# Transcript: final-01.mp4

Hello, everyone. We are Arcades. Today, we're happy to present our spotlight solution for this season of Riley architectural cafes. Hi. Noah here. I've been working in support centers since twenty seventeen and don't enjoy it. I want to change my job and gain a career. I'm looking for help becoming a junior, SRE, and all my Google searches gave me no real answer. I'm lost. Hi. I'm Max. A dual volunteering for Fox over the Fox Foundation. With over twenty years experience in IT management and directorship, I've been lucky enough to use my knowledge to help others transition into new technical careers. Spotlight comes as a relief to the pains Novo experienced along as well as helping Max to reach more candidates. Spotlight provides a platform to automate candidate matching. We match as many trades between candidates and mentors to find the best match. For candidates, satisfied mentors, career roadmaps, visual progress. For nonprofits and mentors, networking, audience growth, partnerships, analytics, and reporting. According to the National Center for Charitable Characteristics, almost eleven million people looked for a job in twenty twenty in the United States. One hundred and eighty million were interested in online courses. Yet, on the other hand, there were one and a half million registered non profit organizations and a quarter of citizens volunteers at least once for any of them. Our Spotlight platform brings effective cooperation between non profits and candidates. For candidates looking for career advice, coaching, weekly spotlights, challenges, mental matching, and career roadmap. For nonprofits, networking, forums, collaboration, new partnerships, and improved visibility. We've identified the following roles within our Spotlight app. A visitor is an authorized actor who can browse communities, events, etcetera. A candidate is a registered user who will decide to change their career. And your admin acts on behalf of an NPO in the platform and defines their list of offered services. Mentor is a volunteer who supports candidates with mentorship and career advice. Community leader onboards NPOs and facilitates regular meetings with NPOs. This represents the system functionality and requirements we identified to enable Spotlight to work effectively. Every action is recorded as a user story in our repository. Feel free to view this slide later in our git repository to really inform. We identified three key characteristics for our architecture. Cost, because diversity cyber council is a has a limited budget. Scalability, since we focus on open online courses, our research has shown one hundred and eighty million potential visitors. Simplicity, we are working on diversity so we can reach a larger audience. Using Architectural Styles worksheet by Mark Richards from developer. Architect dot com, we highlighted the identified key characteristics. And as you can see, the most suitable options are model monolith or macro kernel. We decided to use a modular monolith architecture style. Because of the startup nature of our project, the scope could change dramatically during the proof of concept phase. We want to be able to scale some parts of the system to effectively use resources, so we need to keep modules isolated from each other. You can get more information about this decision in ADR7. CFO stands for Context, Container, Component and CompT. The system context diagram shows how the spotlight fits into Diversey Cyber Council. On top, you see all the actors and their responsibilities. In the middle, we have our spotlight system. At the bottom, we have all the external services our spotlight system uses. Here we see a container diagram which provides deeper view into the scope of our spotlight system, showing our high level technical building blocks. This overview shows how data passes between different contexts of our spotlight system. We've highlighted the most important components, which are the working parts in our proof of concept. For example, let's discuss the engagement context. It contains five modules. They're responsible for retaining users on our platform. The context module encumulates all gamification logic for changes, capture, the flag, and hackathons. The meetings module provides functionality to organize calls and meetings between all platform actors. The messengers model integrates with all popular social messengers allowing in app interactions. The notifications module is responsible for the pushes and email notifications for the actors on of the platform. The ranking module enables sharing achievements, trophies, and budgets through social media. This component diagram shows how the mentor interacts with candidate and vice versa through the spotlight modules. We want to scale spotlight without spending too much time and resources, so we took the decision to deploy our system using AWS cloud. Based on ADR six point zero plus service communication security module, we split our deployment into three security groups. This isolates and minimizes the attack surface in case of an unlikely data breach. The dedicated API gateway hides the two different APIs, the monolith scaling group and the serverless data processing pipeline. Both of them scale well. Monolith scales using auto scaling groups in Elastic Container Service, and serverless uses AWS Lambda with Kinesis Data Fire Holes. This deployment can handle any load spikes easily. This roadmap outlines our expected project timeline once confirmation from real business owners and stakeholders is aligned. To minimize waste, we've planned several proof of concept sprints, including from the start progressive real user UX testing to ensure the interface matches the project requirements. Let's improve diversity in IT with team ArcGates. Thanks to O'Reilly and the organizers for this excellent opportunity.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9933*
