# Transcript: Spotlight App - TheGlobalVariables.mp4

Hi, and welcome to the Global Variables' team presentation of the spotlight app platform for the Diversity Cyber Council. We are a Canadian based team with forty five years of combined experience in IT and with Mark, one hundred fifty years of combined experience. We are passionate in what we do, and we are honored to be able to present you with our solution. Our proposed solution tackles a lack of visibility by enabling the Spotlight app to be a central hub where nonprofits are empowered to identify their service capabilities and publicize their offerings. The Spotlight app also enables the candidates to find services by providing smart recommendations based on the information provided by users and their geographical preferences. The Spotlight mobile app brings the nonprofit services closer to the candidates since most Americans currently own a smartphone. The map view of the nonprofit offerings makes it convenient for candidates to locate the services closest to their desired school, home, or work locations. The notification service also enables Spotlight to advertise new nonprofit offerings to end users based on their desired location or services. Our proposed solution reduces the cost of human resources by automating most of the manual processes that are typically performed by volunteers and employees. Calendly will be used to schedule meetings, and a recommendation engine provides smart initial recommendations for a career roadmap. To reduce the cost of infrastructure, we introduced serverless architecture along with an affordable technology stack. The use of serverless means that the development team does not need to spend time building, securing, and maintaining servers. By using d three and view for the front end development and AWS Amplify for the back end development, the Spotlight app can be developed and deployed faster and more affordably. There are more than twenty five major components like AWS SageMaker, Amplify, and DynamoDB in our proposed system architecture. Please consult our GitHub repository for more details. D three will be utilized to present data visualizations and our and in particular, to make data interactive experiences. These may include force directed graphs to visualize connectivity tissue between parties, geographic heat maps, or numerous other data visualizations. Hybrid cloud is commonly thought to mean multiple hyper scale clouds, which usually implies the least common denominator of compute and storage from each. We've taken it to mean a hybrid approach to selecting cloud services and have focused on and have focused on the best solution for each individual subproblem scope. This leads to a mixed event and microservices serverless architecture that makes use of PaaS and SaaS offerings. This allowed us to hit high marks in several areas and allows for an extremely elastic architecture with little to no sacrifice in most areas. In this context diagram, you can see the relationship between the systems that we're building and other actors. We need to develop and deploy the systems that are in blue, Spotlight, Recommender Engine, and the data analytics platform. In the container diagram, we leverage serverless microservices architecture to design and run the Spotlight app. In developing our architect architecture, we have made six major architecture decisions. We have decided to run a serverless architecture on top of AWS, leaning heavily on Amplify in addition to other SaaS and PaaS services. We have decided not to adopt a process modeling software. In terms of observability, we have opted to use AWS standard tools. And finally, we will be using markdown within our display layer to facilitate heavily editable and interactive documents. We have identified three major risks as shown. Medi mitigating vendor lock in would cause a significant drop in velocity, increasing effort, time to market, and relying heavily on custom built in house components. They are best left explored when the need arises and not plant being planned for prematurely. Each risk does have a path to mitigation if required. This architecture will allow the organization to leapfrog implementation times from years or months to a matter of weeks, and at the same time, provide a road map of technologies that avoids future technical debt from ever even arising in a elastic and cost effective manner. Thank you for listening to our presentation, and have a good day.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9993*
