# Transcript: spotlight-platform-team-pegasuz.mp4

Hello, everyone, and welcome. I'll be presenting the architecture of the spotlight platform, an initiative of the nonprofit organization, Diversity Cyber Council. Here's a quick view of the agenda. Let's dive in. DCC is a five zero one c three organization which serves underrepresented demographics in the tech industry by facilitating education, training, and staffing opportunities. Their goal is to provide access to competent training programs that could lead to direct employment opportunities. What is DCC trying to solve? There is less proportion of underrepresented groups in the tech industry, and there are nearly one point six million NPOs in the United States. And they contribute about one ninety three billion dollars in value to volunteer hours. Since these NPOs are working in silos, there are underlying problems for both NPOs and their consumers. Decentralization and lack of support between NPOs, lack of visibility of NPO offerings. Let's dive into analyzing the requirements. A set of requirements were given as part of the Cartas exercise, and some of them were derived from domain exploration. The team came up with seven top characteristics, usability, workflow, data integrity, evolutionary feasibility, scalability, and availability. Since usability is a top characteristic, we apply design thinking with a user first approach. John is an African American looking to develop his career. He's unemployed due to lack of certain skills and unable to find the right program due to lack of visibility of NPOs. DCC is looking to collaborate and maintain partnerships. Here are the pain points and opportunities. Now let's look at the architecture which would help build the platform. Here is a high level context diagram with user personas and external dependencies of the platform. The team identified the aggregates by performing a hybrid of event storming plus actor action approach. The aggregates were then grouped based on cohesion to identify services. The services were then grouped based on synchronous connaissance to identify the quanta. This is a logical architectural diagram showcasing the high level functionalities of the platform. Here is an in-depth component architecture diagram with all the quantum put together. Let's dive into a few of them. NPO candidate quantum. This is responsible for managing NPO candidate registrations, offerings, assignments, posts, and a lot more. It also integrates with the LinkedIn system to fetch candidate carrier profile if you authorize us to do so. The top three LTs are evaluability, scalability, and availability. Since it is a greenfield project, feasibility may also be a concern. Proposal is to start with a modular monolith and then evolve to a microservices plus event driven architecture. NPO integration quantum. This is responsible for managing integration with existing NPO APIs. The top abilities are workflow, feasibility, and configurability. Proposed architecture styles are microkernel for introducing new NPO integrations and event driven for enabling workflows. Here are a few artifacts we use to derive the architectural characteristics and the style. This one was used for NP candidate quantum where we proposed modular monolith for MVP. These are some of the architectural decisions we made. Let's take a look at one of them, the API standard. Here, we compared GraphQL, REST, and gRPC, made a decision, identified the trade offs, and corresponding mitigation strategies. Here is how the final UI might look like. John is able to see the updates from NPOC's following, view math services based on his interest, get enrolled to a program, and then track his goals bay set by his mentor. And here, DCC manages NPO profile and offerings, checks the engagement response from users, manages the candidates enrolled to their program, and reviews the partnerships with other NPOs. Let's look at the road map. For MVP, the proposal is to start with the NP candidate quantum with a modular monolith architectural style, then set up the infrastructure to deploy, host, and monitor the above service. This could be used as a template for other quanta as well. Longer term, plan to migrate NP candidate quantum to microservices based event driven architecture and then introduce model training to provide better recommendations based on user activity. This is team Pegasus, and thank you for watching.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9988*
