# Transcript: architecture_solution_story_12minutes.mp4

Welcome everyone to our submission for the O'Reilly Architects Mercatus winter twenty twenty four. My name is Vishal Gamgee, and my team is systems of funds. My team members are Arshada, Subodh, and Jibran. Here's our story to follow in five chapters, starting with the introduction, navigating challenges, dueling architecture and operational obstacles, Eureka, which is a solution, and then closing out, the presentation. So for this year's WinterCadis, we have a medical software company called Stay Healthy, which wants to build an on premise solution hosted at hospitals for monitoring patient vitals data. Now they have, two popular cloud based products already, SAS products, monitor them, and my medical data. The new system that they're proposing on building, which is monitor me, must integrate with my medical data, which is their own proprietary EHR system. And they also, like, stay healthy is also going to provide, their own, proprietary, monitoring devices, the IoT devices. Now some of the key business drivers for this new system, monitor me, the the one that we're building, the key business drivers are accurate and real time patient monitoring, timely and actionable alerts, data driven insights for better patient outcomes. Now as we get into this next chapter, this chapter is where we're going to get into technical complexities, like how do we handle variable data rate, variable rate data emissions coming from devices while still considering reliability, high availability, real time operations, and low latency. There were deployment and hosting considerations given the solution had to be hosted on premises, And this was a business risk for stay healthy as they hadn't operated in such, a business model before where they had to go in and deploy something at third party, like a custard a customer, install. So that that was something we had to consider. Additionally, there were integration and interoperability requirements to consider for integrating with my medical data, you know, the the EHR system. Finally, scalability and future expansion considerations, were also, taken you know, we had to consider those. Now these are by no means exhaustive by any means. We do have a list of all the other architecture characteristics, implicit ones and the explicit ones that I'm going to go over, briefly. Let me walk you through the process of untangling these complexities. Because, yes, there there actually is a method to the madness of going through these complexities and coming up with, the next steps. First, we started off with, identifying the actors, actions, and the components, which is looking at, the personas and the people who interact with the system or the, the nurses, the medical professionals, the system admins, and what actions do they take with the system. And those actions then, resulted in us coming up with, you know, the the components for the system, which are listed at the bottom of the screen in those yellow boxes. Next up, based on the components, actions, and the actors, we do also and also the main requirements, we come up with a list of candidate architectural characteristics. This is an exhaustive list, but then we filtered it down to seven driving characteristics, performance, high availability, interoperability, scalability, deployability, and data integrity. Of these, we selected top three, which were performance, high availability, and interoperability. These were all based on the requirements and not something just we just willingly came up with. We also had these implicit characteristics, which were usability, security, because we were working with health care data. So that was definitely an implicit characteristic, which was, we we had to be handled by default. Observability for telemetry and, data logging, etcetera. There were other characteristics also considered as you can see. Next up, we also did some capacity planning because we wanted to capture the re understand how and what data are we dealing with on a daily basis, on a hourly basis. So what kind of storage capacity do we need? And this gave us an idea into this thinking of systems which could be partition tolerant because, let's say, if a a blood pressure, a device, and a service went down, we don't want to shut down the entire system just because of that. We don't want the entire system to fail. So this gave us an idea. And, let me move move on. Next up is the architecture style selection. So based on the, architecture characteristics that we picked, we did a mapping, and we looked at which architecture style fits best for our needs. And it was it was a tie. We needed a mix of both microservices and event driven because they both were scalable, met the interoperability need, high in terms of deployability and fault alter fault tolerance as well. And then this begins the next chapter, which is can also be termed as the, uncomfortable and conflicting discussions for the introvert kind. Just getting there. This is where, you know, the team actually did a great job evaluating our architectural design decisions and, being able to you know, pick one versus another, bring the pros and the cons. And the key was to document these choices as architecture decision records that supported the requirements. And, it supported the the requirements and the architecture characteristics that we picked. So all of this documentation help. So let me highlight three examples of ADRs. Here's one where we selected Kubernetes EKS for its reasons of high availability and scalability. We also call out the ability for the microservices architecture to be partition tolerant. It's modular. It's maintainable. We also call out the, some of the negatives that, you know, come along with this. Here's another one where we highlight the use of ambassador API gateway deployable in self hosted mode in a container part because we want to support the integration with my medical, data requirement, the EHR data requirement integration via secure HTTP. And all of this deployment should happen, in almost in a in a remote or remote approach. Right? Next up is here's another, ADR that highlights the use of AWS outpost servers or on premises installation in a hybrid cloud setup. And listing the positives, just faster time to market, local do the it supports the local storage, and local storage and processing needs that we have as a requirement, low latency data processing. Of course, there is negatives that come with it. So as you see, these are some of the, ADRs that we went over. Then, we now we get into the next chapter, which is, the Eureka moment. Well, we call it the Eureka moment because this is where we get into the solutioning. Now putting all of the analysis, the architecture style selection, and the ADRs, it it really gives a framework, where we could just pull parts and pull in and build our high level architecture. And it's just a mental model, which makes it easier for us to, get to the final result. Now I'll I'll go over the final result in a few c four diagrams. Note that we only use level c one, the context, and c two, which is containers intentionally given the complexity of the solution. We don't go into c three and c four. And finally, we get into the deployment overview as well. So here's the high level architecture of this the, high level architecture diagram, the system context diagram, that shows you the external stay healthy, bounds, shows you the hospital bounds and what we are building. Here's the container diagram, which shows you again the hospital. Stay healthy. But all we're doing is now expanding the, monitor me box, which is just zooming in. So let me go back and show you between this diagram and here. All I did was zoom in into that box. Now the next diagram I'm going to show you is also another zoom in level, which is another c two diagram, a container diagram. It's just going to zoom in to the microservices, box here. And it shows you how we use, you know, for from the bottom up. Right? From the patient level, we are via the IoT devices. We're reading these the device data, sending it to an MQTT broker, which is using the MQTT protocol. And we have all of these microservices, which are separate individual microservices to support the, fault tolerant, nature of the system. And it is and then we have database. We have other services, show the API gateway, which is interacting with the, with my medical data. Right? And finally, here's the, deployment diagram. Again, it's a high level deployment diagram with, two AWS outpost servers, in a high availability mode. Because if one goes down, the other is still up, and they both get deployed on the client side, which is at the hospital. You have, EKS with microservices. We have pods running the API gateway, the MQTT broker. We also have nurse station web app running same, a d, Amazon RDS, PostgreSQL. So, finally, we get to, the end. We hope that, the solution we presented covers all the business requirements and will help build a working system, which will enhance patient care. This has been a great opportunity to learn building an end to end, system and helped us hone our system design skills and architecture skills. So thank you for the opportunity. I'll end the presentation now.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9984*
