Architecture Katas On-line
Spring 2022




  NFJS Software Symposium Series 2016
      Neal Ford
      Thoughtworks
      Director / Software Architect / Meme Wrangler
      http://www.nealford.com
      @neal4d
Introduction
                  h i s
              d t       ?
          d i       o m
      r e        fr
   he      m  e
W c       o
   e a
i d
  Wh
ide   ere
   a c did
      om       thi
          e fr s
              om
                  ?
                     http://fundamentalsofsoftwarearchitecture.com/katas/

               n …
             he
       d   t
 a   n
…
               n …
             he
       d   t
 a   n
…
Late 2020…
Judges Criteria
Clarity of
narrative,
organization,
and supporting
documentation
Narrative and Organization
A narrative tells the story of the architectural solution
Narrative and Organization
  A narrative arc a literary term for the path a story
 follows. It provides a backbone by providing a clear
       beginning, middle, and end of the story
https://github.com/TheJedis2020/arch_katas_2020
https://github.com/miyagis-forests/
         farmacy-food-kata
https://github.com/lookfwd/archkata
Completeness of
solution
    Completeness of Solution




What’s Missing?
Identification of
supporting
architecture
characteristics
    Architecture Characteristics
Architecture characteristics form the foundational aspects of the
 architecture and are required for proper trade-off analysis and
                        decision making


                                           Scope

                                           Justification
https://www.developertoarchitect.com/downloads/worksheets.html
  https://www.developertoarchitect.com/lessons/lesson112.html
Diagrams –
types, level of
detail, and
completeness
                        Diagrams
An effective architecture picture is worth more than a 1,000 words.
   Architecture represents topology, which benefits from visual
                          representations.


                         “The goal of a diagram is to
                         convey a clear and shared
                         understanding of the
                         architecture”
                                             - Neal Ford
                            Diagrams
An effective architecture picture is worth more than a 1,000 words.
   Architecture represents topology, which benefits from visual
                          representations.




       component diagrams                context diagrams
                          Diagrams
An effective architecture picture is worth more than a 1,000 words.
   Architecture represents topology, which benefits from visual
                          representations.




       user journey diagrams             sequence diagrams
                             Diagrams
An effective architecture picture is worth more than a 1,000 words.
   Architecture represents topology, which benefits from visual
                          representations.




     system-level diagrams            deployment diagrams
                        Diagrams
An effective architecture picture is worth more than a 1,000 words.
   Architecture represents topology, which benefits from visual
                          representations.




                        user interface mockups
Architecture
decision
records –
documentation
and justification
    Second Law of
Software Architecture

    “Why is more
 important then how”
          architecture decision records
                  short text file; 1-2 pages long, one file per decision
                  markdown, textile, asciidoc, plaintext, etc.
# Title
                           short noun phrase
## Status
…                          proposed, accepted, superseded

## Context                 description of the problem and alternative
…
                           solutions available (documentation)
## Decision
…
                           decision and justification (the “why”)
## Consequences
…                          trade-offs and impact of decision
architecture decision records
                  architecture decision records
ADR 001: Use the microservice architecture style with containerization
Farmacy Food is a start up company and does not have a sizeable team of experienced developers
available. The overarching architecture style for the Farmacy Food system should be simple, easy to
create, maintain and evolve. Finding developers that can create and evolve the system, as well as tools
and frameworks that support the system should not require heaps of money. In other words, Farmacy
Food is not in a position to be an early adopter, and should hence adopt an established architecture style
that supports evolution.
                    architecture decision records
ADR_004 Use a centralized notification for external communication

Context
There was some confusion around the purpose of the notification component. Specifically, is this component
an event bus for all communication or is it a shared component for communicating externally.

Decision
We decided to have a dedicated notification system responsible of sending external notification. The reasons
include:
Overall
solution
            Overall Solution
The architecture solution describes the overall structure
     of the system and how it will be constructed

                         Are the architecture characteristics demonstrated
                         in the solution?

                         Is the solution appropriate and feasible given
                         the project constraints?

                         Are the architecture styles selected represented
                         in the solution?
Integration

Feasibility
Agility

Availability

Security

Scalability
Final
architecture
presentation
(semi-finalist)
Meet the SME
Odie Gray
Founder & President, Diversity Cyber Council
                 Odie Gray is a disabled military veteran, cybersecurity
                 professional, and businessman of 15 years specializing in
                 business strategy development and transformation. As a
                 thought leader in this space, he’s delivered strategic value to
                 his clients by developing new cybersecurity service offerings
                 and programs and managing teams for industry-leading
                 organizations.
Meet the Judges
David Bock

             David Bock is the vice president of strategic development
             at Core4ce, where he helps turn new ideas into
             successfully executed business plans. Previously, David
             was the VP of tech and engineering mission support at
             Decisiv, where he was responsible for internal IT
             operations, site reliability engineering, quality assurance,
             security, customer service, and the company’s release and
             triage teams. David served as the editor of O'Reilly's
             OnJava.com website, has been published in several books
             and magazines, and frequently speaks on technology and
             team processes at software conferences.
Lukasz Dynowski

          Lukasz Dynowski is a Copenhagen-based independent
          consultant. Over his 10+ year IT career, he’s worked with
          cloud, DevOps, full stack, software architecture, and other
          stuff that he wishes to forget. He’s a firm believer in the
          open source movement and in the values behind the
          Agile Manifesto. Lukasz is a former winner of Architectural
          Katas and is ranked in the first 0.2% of developers on
          Stack Overflow. He's also a geek and beloved husband
          and father to two lovely kids.
Jacqui Read

              Jacqui Read is a thought leader in the documentation and
              communication of design, outlining technical solutions to a
              broad variety of audiences, from technical leads to the C-
              suite and from developers to prospective clients. She’s an
              experienced software architect and has worked in domains
              including fintech and big data, in roles such as software
              developer, technical architect, and solution architect. From
              her origins publishing blog posts and gists, she’s become
              involved in user groups, workshops, and conferences. In
              2021, she led the winning team at the autumn O'Reilly
              Architectural Katas challenge. Her interests include living
              documentation, NoSQL, and Agile practices, with a focus
              on learning and improvement through iteration.
Contest Details
                    Mission:


 Diversity Cyber Council is a 501c3 Non-Profit that
  serves under-represented demographics in the
tech industry by facilitating education, training, and
  staffing opportunities to establish a sustainable
    and diverse talent pipeline to the workforce.
            Vision

Our vision is to enhance inclusion
 and representation in the tech
   industry through training,
  mentoring, networking, and
       visibility programs.
                  Goal

 Our goal is to establish a sustainable and
diverse talent pipeline that extends career
equity to underrepresented demographics
by providing access to competent training
programs that lead to direct employment
               opportunities.
                       The Kata

Program Name: Spotlight App/Platform

Program Summary: The Spotlight App Project is a sustained
effort to amass a coalition of nonprofits in order to address
specific needs within the communities we serve by leveraging a
centralized platform as the base of operations to collaborate
and make a collective impact.
                    The Kata
Problem Statement #1: The decentralization and lack of
support between nonprofits create gaps of service and
overall impact.

Problem Statement #2: The lack of visibility of nonprofit
groups and offerings creates a barrier of access to the
people we aim to serve.

Technology Solution Description: Nonprofit Networking
Hub & Diverse Candidate Career Case Management
Tool
           Solution Summary
A technology solution that serves the purpose of enhancing
visibility, support, and collaboration of nonprofits serving
similar needs in the community and operate as a candidate
case management platform.

Users:
Non-Profit with offering (“Non-Profit”) - group with a
platform integration offering
Candidate - consumer of non-profit offerings, delivered via
the platform
Administrators - Management of the platform, registering
Non-Profits
                           Requirements
The Platform must establish a way to incentivize engagement such as sharing of
resources, collaboration, networking, facilitating introductions, and partnerships
The Platform must categorize/tag nonprofit support services to match candidate
needs identified in the onboarding assessment to include but not limited to
• Resume Writing Services
• Interview Prep
• Free Business Attire
• Apprenticeship Program Registration
• Training Program Registration
• College & University Registration
• Free Grocery & Meal Services
• Discounted Rent & Housing Services
• Daycare/Child Care Services
• Mentorship/Career Advocate Services
                         Requirements
• End-Use Ease of Use is a hard requirement
• Tracking candidate progress is a hard requirement
• Tracking engagement is a hard requirement
• The Platform must provide a way to allow Non-Profits to publicize offerings to the
  platform that can provide some level of automatic matching for Candidate requests.
• The Platform allows offerings to contain rich text, links, and downloadable readable
  content such as PDFs, but no other downloads.
• Each offering must support a certain list of properties (defined by the platform),
  such as name, organization description, website, unique identifier (assigned by the
  Administrators) and other identification information.
• The Platform must provide both operational reports (number of candidate matches /
  period, number of offerings / region, and so on) and analytical reports (projections
  of future desirable career paths, Offering gaps in a region based on demand, and so
  on) for use by Administrators.
                Reminder

Think critically about the nonprofit and candidate
 experience, anticipate these users needs while
    developing the use case and user stories.
  Consider what can offer these users maximum
 value to fulfill the intent of logging on the app.
         Resources


https://www.diversitycybercouncil.com/
                    Important Dates
• All teams must submit a google form
  (https://forms.gle/xE1L3P95szQz3FTLA) by Wednesday,
  May 25 at 12PM Eastern to participate
          th



•   Solutions are due in your GitHub repo by Friday, June 3 ,
                                                           rd

    11:59PM Eastern

• Semifinalists will be announced at the second event on
  Thursday, June 16   th



• Questions? Email us at katas@oreilly.com
Architecture Katas On-line
Spring 2022




  NFJS Software Symposium Series 2016
      Neal Ford
      Thoughtworks
      Director / Software Architect / Meme Wrangler
      http://www.nealford.com
      @neal4d
