# Transcript: Pentagram2021-Final-Presentation.mp4

Welcome guys to O'Reilly Architecture, twenty twenty one. We actually are a team, Pentagon twenty twenty one with five members, and we build actually pharmacy family system, architecture and design that we want to share with you guys. So what is the problem that we are trying to solve? Bob actually has been, using, pharmacy food, which is an existing system, you know, where all, Mantraex is actually to use food as medicine. Bob actually has been, using the platform using the right food and getting actually great benefits but what actually he thinks is missing is is this whole where he can actually now be the wise of the program because he's getting great results he wants actually others to also get the great results he wants to engage more with the community. He wants to actually, engage easily with with his doctors, with his dietitianist, and then want actually to rely more with the system. Your system actually can recommend, the right amount, the right type of food, for him. So those are actually some of the areas that, that, what actually, we're gonna be looking, to see how we can actually extend this pharmacy food, to a point where we can actually deliver these these extra benefits added benefits to it. And that's where actually the solution comes into picture. Pharmacy food team has been thinking about the solution for quite some time and hearing actually their customers they believe this is the right time because pharmacy food has been running, and serving actually their customer with the intended need, what it used to, what it was actually built for. And now, actually, they think, they should be actually thinking about the architecture and design for the next chapter of the platform where they can actually support better engagement model where customer can come and then you know engage with their real, the same minded people, get better actually educated on different sorts of wellness programs, easily able to engage with their doctors, get different sorts of extra results being done as well as if in their dietitianers. And at the end of the day, actually rely more on the platform because now this, new platform is gonna have actually a full, three sixty kind of a view of different sets of data, of their customers, not just actually about the customer itself, but, you know, what type of, community that the customer is engaging, what their doctor is saying, what their dietitian is saying. So based on all this data, actually, the the system can, collect all the data, do some analytics, and then do some recommendations that, hey. This type of food actually is, better for, these type of customers and, making sure the smart phages actually have been filled with the right amount of food in that vicinity or that area and the food actually is not going waste. That's where actually this new system pharmacy family comes into picture. Now let's dive actually deeper into what are the, architecture characteristics and styles, that we're gonna be using. So, you know, in terms of actually quality attributes, or what we call elitist or characteristics, you know, we actually list as a team listed down actually these, left hand side, the list of, requirements, and they've been actually numbered with r one and and so on for traceability perspective. But on the on the right hand side, you know, we basically, label them, we basically kind of color code them in different colors, with with with the thinking that, yeah, that's basically based on our understanding and we actually were understood as a team that these are actually the the characteristics from that requirement. So it's kind of actually extracting out the quality attributes from the requirements, which is one of the, critical, thing to do during the architecture and design. And we actually made sure that we kind of, align ourselves between these seven to eight characteristics, which is, kind of actually, is is is what, is recommended. And and some of these characteristics, if you see, you know, being actually, had multi or multi colors is because what we believe there's some requirements, they are actually kind of addressing multiple requirements at the same time. And then considering that what could be actually the right architecture style? You know in today's world almost every system that we build is actually a distributed system at the end of the day and and people's actually or teams default or defacto thing is hey let's actually build microservices. But what we as a team based on our experience believe in things, microservices actually, for sure is easy to start, but it's difficult to manage. You really actually need a great, level of discipline and tooling. Now there are actually a lot of good tools available as of today but, you know, that requires actually a little bit of maturity as well. And what we believe, this being actually more kind of a startup mode, does probably will not have the right skill sets right now to deal with, with the complexity that comes actually with the microservices. And and, that's, the reason actually we recommend that, you know, we should be using the service based architecture style. Also, actually, that it it allows in future to do an easy migration towards the microservices. Plus, you know, in today's world, any, architecture that, distributed, system that we build has at least sixty five to ten percent needs of the event driven, kind of a nature. So event driven is is is is another mix, here from the architecture. So so let's actually deep dive into the system design and, wanna actually give you a quick overview of the how actually we think. So we started actually with this, say, how we're gonna be actually identifying our our components. So component identification, we, as a team, actually tried to did, some based on the requirements. Actually, just thought about it. What could be actually different sorts of components and then try to align them with different requirements. If you remember the r one, r two, and all these basically are the, kind of, requirements, high level requirements that, that we as a team identified. And then, you know, did some, from the DDD perspective that what could be actually some strategic, design from the core supportive and and and and generic kind of, actually, components that we need. And, let's now actually kind of, deep dive into, okay, the user journey and then some of the other architectural, diagrams from the context and and what we did actually, we build actually a CFO model. So this actually shows a user journey where user actually from pharmacy food customer becomes an engaged customer, and then from there, actually, they can have different model, engagement models within within our platform. And, you know, and at the end of the day, actually, there's gonna be analytics, and then that's gonna be, basically what, recommends the food. But let's actually dive into what is the subsystem landscape diagram. This basically is not just considering the, the pharmacy family, system that we are building, but it's basically considering, what actually all these different systems, which are in play in order for us to build the pharmacy family system. So it says what are different actors, dietitianist, pharmacy family customer, medical care, pharmacy food customer. These are all actually different types of actors that's out there. And then, you know, in inside the boundary, these are the different systems that, are going to be actually in play in order to build actually that, like, CMS system, e diet and dietitian system, nutrition system, notification system, pharmacy food system, which is an existing system, and an analytic system. So, you know, the next level is is, next, level from the system diagram is actually called the context diagram. So the context diagram is basically now very specifically talking about, the pharmacy family, system, because that's actually the system in context, as of now. And then what are the the actors actually in play? And then the next level is a very specific pharmacy family container because we also actually have a, analytics, a container as well. So this actually talks about the pharmacy family container, We are now, you know, in over here, we we saw this pharmacy family system, and this basically is drilling down actually the pharmacy family. What are the different things? You know, there are web applications, single page application, the mobile application that's basically out there. And then and these are all actually kind of a, front end and and serving the static contents and then the API application serving actually the the back end side of the things, and then one database and then the other systems that are actually in play. The next actually, dive is basically the pharmacy family component system, which is, basically now drilling down deeper into this API application, and then say, okay. What are the different things that are, going to be actually part of that? And that's the reason, you know, the boundary actually here is just actually that API component and other, kind of components that are outside the boundary of that. But it's showing that, you know, all these different, components that are going to be actually in play, and then how they're gonna be actually interacting with with those, other, systems, dependent system, for example, CMS notification or medical system, And and, you know, for sure, actually, the database that we have. This actually shows a container diagram for the analytics. You know, we're gonna have actually our different data sources from where actually the data is gonna come, goes by the even bus. Actually, it goes to the injection, and then we're gonna actually have our data lake where, from where actually it's, we're gonna have our ML running and then, basically, you know, training our model. And then once actually the model is available, anytime actually the we need to actually run the analytics, we run actually on that model and then get the results back. This actually shows the pharmacy family deployment diagram. You know, it's basically again a c four model diagram, here, showing actually what are the different components and, what what are the different configurations, and then how the database actually is gonna be in play, the other dependent systems. Basically, that's not actually in our control. For example, biomedical system and seamless system, we are gonna be relying on on third party systems. But, you know, still actually from the deployment perspective, we need to we need to actually, make sure that we, we do actually show them, show them here as well. And, this actually shows the primary and secondary database as well from the data deployment diagram perspective. These are actually some of the key links. As you know, we just actually quickly go over the presentation. But these are actually some of the key links you can go where we start actually with the requirements, with the quality attributes, the ADRs, and the oral solution. One can actually, have a much more deeper, view, once actually going into, into those things. The last but not the least, I wanna thank you, the O'Reilly platform, Neil Ford, especially actually, you know, driving, these architecture cutters. For most of our team members, actually, this was the first time we really actually had a great fun. It was actually challenging, to be honest, because, you know, we all actually have our day job and stuff like that. That day day job, actually, most of the time actually goes and, you know, becomes a night job as we all know, you know, the the kind of environment we are in. So big shout out for the whole team, to make it at least actually this far. Whatever actually the the outcome outcome is gonna be, that's actually beyond our hands. So so shout out actually the whole team to, to make it actually happen till, till this far. Thank you.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9930*
