# Transcript: Pentagram2021-Final-Presentation-6mins.mp4

Hello, everyone, to this O'Reilly Architecture twenty twenty one. We are Pentagram twenty twenty one, and these are the five members. Who want to share, the pharmacy family system architecture and design with you guys. So what is the problem statement? Bob actually has been using, this existing system called pharmacy food, where the whole idea is to use food as medicine. Awesome idea. And he's been actually seeing the great results. But he's actually thinking that how we can be more engaged within the platform where he can actually be, you know, engaging with other customers, with his doctors, dieticians, and rely more on the system so that the system can recommend, better foods, to treat actually different sorts of, medical problems that, he or other, for example, in the community are going through. And that's where actually this solution comes into pictures. The pharmacy food team has been thinking about, extension of this platform and, actually heard their, their customers as well, and that's where this pharmacy family, idea came into existence. So let's actually dive into the characteristics and architectural styles. We as a team actually list down these high level requirements, number them r one, r two, and and so on for traceability perspective. I color coded them. And then on the right hand side, you see these are the quality attributes out of those requirements that we as a team thinks, those requirements are talking about. And we try to actually limit them between seven to eight. And these are explicit, architecturalities, and there are some implicit one, but, you know, for now, we can just focus on these. And considering, these, quality attributes, for sure, we're gonna be building a distributed system. And any distributed system that we build nowadays, typically, most of them are the default thing mindset is, hey. Let's actually start building the microservices. But we, as a team, based on our experience, believes that, microservices, it's easier for most of the time to build, but really difficult to manage if we don't actually use the right frameworks, tools, and actually requires a set of firm maturity, as well. And considering pharmacy, system or pharmacy team still actually, in in in the in the startup mode, it's better actually to use a mix of, service based architecture style, which actually basically also provides we have few services with the database and also actually, provides a path towards migration in future to the microservices that need be, along with actually the event driven because any distributed system we built, as of today has some sort of actually even driven needs as well. So let's actually dive into the system design. Well, you know, we started actually with a typical component identification based on the requirements, you know, try to map actually those components what we think, with with the with the requirements. And at the end of the day, actually have some kind of a ballpark figure. What what are the things the components that we need to build? What are the things that we can actually, for example, get it from either the cloud providers or or something else? This is actually a typical user journey where, you know, what it says is a pharmacy food customer actually becomes an engaged customer. And then from there onwards within the pharmacy family, they have different, models engagement models that, you know, they can basically be part of. And at the end of the day, actually getting some, great results actually out of it. So let's actually, look at the landscape diagram. So system landscape diagram actually not very specifically just talking the pharmacy family system here in this case, but all these different systems that are in play in order for us to build actually the pharmacy family system. So, you know, you see the pharmacy food system, note analytic system, CMS, medical, eDietrichationist, notification, all these different systems that are in play and then different actors. Now let's actually dive into the pharmacy family. So this is a very specific family family, system context diagram and all these other systems that either pharmacy family, integrates or those systems actually rely on the pharmacy, pharmacy family system, in general. And then this is actually a container diagram in terms of c four model, and this is now actually we are basically diving into the pharmacy pharmacy family system, typical. And we see, actually, there's a web application, mobile application, for different sets of, you know, users that we gonna have, and they can actually access it, through different means. We have actually our single page application that actually, then integrates with the API applications in the backbone or the backend of our applications. There's a database, and the API application integrates with other third party systems as well. This is is a component diagram, which is a deep, the next level inside the API application, how the API applications basically has been built. And as we see, there are different controllers, different components, different facade. And, you know, it says, like, how it's gonna integrate with with these different, systems that we're gonna be relying. For example, CMS notifications, our database, and and and things like that. This is actually the analytics container diagram. You know, basically indicates that there there are different data sources coming in, goes through the event bus, which we are gonna be using Kafka as per our our, ADR. And then, you know, while the, injection process, it goes and then, you know, there's gonna be a a training m a model which can generate sixty in, an ML. And, you know, then we're gonna be actually rely on the ML to do some recommendations at the end of the day. This actually in general, shows the pharmacy family deployment diagrams. You know, you see there are API applications, there are web applications, databases, primary and secondary database, and other actually dependent systems that are not actually in our control because most of most of the time, for example, CMS system, medical system, these are actually already existing, system that, running most probably in on on the cloud that we're gonna be relying on. These are some of the key links, that's actually out there. We started with the requirements for the attributes and overall solutions. Last but not the least, I wanna thank, actually, Neil and other judges to provide actually this platform. For most of our team members, actually, this is the first time and a big shout out actually for for for my whole team because I know with the day job is it it was difficult, but we made it actually to this one. So put us to the to the to the whole team. And, and thank you.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9939*
