# Transcript: Hey Dragon Team - Arch Katas.mp4

Hello, everyone. This is Tim Heydragon, and we would like to guide you through our proposal for the O'Reilly architectural cutters. Given that a system architecture is driven by business needs for startup products, architecture characteristics are significantly different than the for a mature one. In other words, architecture needs to be evolutionary and reflect the evolution and development of the underlying product. Considering this vision, our team has came up with, top level architecture that captures crucial stages of product and its system architecture evolution, such as stage one, layered monolith to satisfy early startup business needs Stage two, service based to enable the system midterm growth and development. Stage three, finally, event based microservices to tackle complex product scalability and availability requirements. Each architecture evolution stage needs to be considered as a snapshot. It does not mean big bang architectural changes. Rather, stage transition needs to happen incrementally. As a rule, there won't be a need for full system architecture evolution. Depending on business needs, some part of the system may stay monolithic, while other parts can evolve towards a more complex architecture. The layered monolith has the benefit of faster time to market because of the inherent simplicity when compared with other architecture styles. Still having an evolution in mind, we can consider aspects like the domain driven design, known design patterns, and abstractions to better support an evolution into the composed services and, ultimately, microservices architecture that provides better support for characteristics like scaling, which doesn't appear to be a major concern at the moment when looking at the current and foreseeable number of users. The presentation API layer includes an adapter design pattern to be able to extract any model of a fridge that is or will be used and translate the communication to a contract we know and control. The back ends for front end's cloud design pattern is also a suggestion to allow both abstracting and optimizing the user experience through through the different front ends we would like to enable. The business logic layer provides the composition of the main processes and rules of our domain that we could leverage in future stages of the evolution to break down into separate services. Here, all of these still share the same debt access layer where the actual persistent storage is abstracted but is not independent and will be part of the critical path and could be a single point of failure. The main motivation to note the stage two of the architecture evolution is the decomposition of the layered monolith architecture into several independent and separately deployed services. Such decomposition provides various benefits, such as improved scalability where services can be scaled independently on each other, which makes the distributed application more flexible in terms of reaction to specific performance and availability needs of its services. Another motivation for decomposition is to make deployability of the application easier because independent services can have independent release cycles. This change not only makes the deployment easier but also helps to shorten the time to market for services features. Stage three, event based microservices. It's a time when complex product requires complex architectural solution. In this stage of product development, the system demands higher resiliency, finer grained scalability, and frequent smaller deployments. Existing coarse grain services have been decomposed into finer grain single responsibility microservices. Lots of efforts have been spent on data story architecture to minimize shared database usage by multiple microservices. The primary interface between servers are formally grid rest APIs and lightweight event bus. Nearly every change in the system may trigger domain events. All interested services can subscribe to various events minimize code sharing between multiple teams and external dependencies. Smaller services naturally lead to small deployment units. So deployment can be done per single feature completion instead of being bank releases. Normally, single feature may require only a few microservice deployments. Of course, there are also negative consequences. Such complex architecture demands advanced software development skills, complex infrastructure topology, complex CICD processes, environment monitoring, centralized logging aggregation, and other analysis tools. So thank you again for this opportunity. This was a very interesting exercise. We really enjoyed and had final exploring. We hope we were able to emphasize a couple of Vespas' evolutionary architecture and how they apply to this real business use case.

---
*Transcribed by Deepgram Nova-2 | Confidence: 0.9977*
