                      Deriving Architectural
                      Tactics: A Step Toward
                      Methodical Architectural
                      Design

                      Felix Bachmann
                      Len Bass
                      Mark Klein




                      March 2003




TECHNICAL REPORT
CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
ESC-TR-2003-004
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890




Deriving Architectural
Tactics: A Step Toward
Methodical Architectural
Design

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
ESC-TR-2003-004


Felix Bachmann
Len Bass
Mark Klein




March 2003


Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Initiative




Unlimited distribution subject to the copyright.
This report was prepared for the

SEI Joint Program Office
HQ ESC/DIB
5 Eglin Street
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2116


The ideas and findings in this report should not be construed as an official DoD position. It is published in the
interest of scientific and technical information exchange.

FOR THE COMMANDER




Christos Scondras
Chief of Programs, XPK

This work is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense. The Software Engineering Institute is a
federally funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense.


Copyright 2003 by Carnegie Mellon University.


NO WARRANTY


THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS
FURNISHED ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS OBTAINED
FROM USE OF THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT.


Use of any trademarks in this report is not intended in any way to infringe on the rights of the trademark holder.


Internal use. Permission to reproduce this document and to prepare derivative works from this document for internal use is
granted, provided the copyright and "No Warranty" statements are included with all reproductions and derivative works.


External use. Requests for permission to reproduce this document or prepare derivative works of this document for external
and commercial use should be addressed to the SEI Licensing Agent.


This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number F19628-00-C-0003 with Carnegie Mel-
lon University for the operation of the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded research and development center.
The Government of the United States has a royalty-free government-purpose license to use, duplicate, or disclose the work,
in whole or in part and in any manner, and to have or permit others to do so, for government purposes pursuant to the copy-
right license under the clause at 252.227-7013.


For information about purchasing paper copies of SEI reports, please visit the publications portion of our Web site
(http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/pubweb.html).
Table of Contents




Abstract..................................................................................................................vii

1      Introduction .....................................................................................................1

2      Review of Key Concepts .................................................................................5
       2.1 General and Concrete Scenarios...............................................................5
       2.2 Tactics .......................................................................................................6

3      Garage Door Example .....................................................................................9

4      Scenario 1: Performance Scenario to a Design Fragment.......................... 11
       4.1 Step 1: Pick a Concrete Scenario ............................................................ 11
       4.2 Step 2: Type-Check the Concrete Scenario ............................................. 11
       4.3 Step 3: Identify Candidate Reasoning Frameworks .................................13
       4.4 Step 4: Determine the Bound and Free Parameters ................................14
       4.5 Step 5: Determine the Tactics Associated with the Free Parameters .......15
       4.6 Step 6: Assign the Free Parameters an Initial Set of Values ....................17
       4.7 Step 7: Select Tactics and Apply Them to the Bind Values to Achieve the
           Required Response Measure ..................................................................18
       4.8 Step 8: Allocate Responsibilities to the Architectural Elements of the De-
           sign Fragments That Are Associated with the Selected Tactics................20

5      Scenario 2: Modifiability Scenario to a Design Fragment...........................23
       5.1 Step 1: Pick a Concrete Scenario ............................................................23
       5.2 Step 2: Type-Check the Concrete Scenarios ...........................................23
       5.3 Step 3: Identify Candidate Reasoning Frameworks .................................25
       5.4 Step 4: Determine the Bound and Free Parameters ................................27
       5.5 Step 5: Determine the Tactics Associated with the Free Parameters .......28
       5.6 Step 6: Assign the Free Parameters an Initial Set of Values ....................30
       5.7 Step 7: Select Tactics and Apply Them to the Bind Values to Achieve the
           Required Response Measure .................................................................30
           5.7.1 Using a Compiler as an Intermediary ...........................................32
           5.7.2 Using an OS as an Intermediary ..................................................32


CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                                        i
      5.8 Step 8: Allocate Responsibilities to the Architectural Elements of the De-
          sign Fragments That Are Associated with the Selected Tactics ............... 33

6     Coupling Concrete Scenarios to Design Fragments .................................. 35
      6.1 Assets Available ...................................................................................... 35
      6.2 Steps for Coupling Concrete Scenarios to Design Fragments ................ 36

7     Summary and Remaining Open Issues ....................................................... 41

Appendix A         General Scenarios.......................................................................... 43

Appendix B Tactics............................................................................................. 47

References/Bibliography ...................................................................................... 53




ii                                                                                      CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
List of Figures



Figure 1:   Design Fragment Associated with the Increase Logical Concurrency and
            Determine Scheduling Policy Tactics.....................................................21

Figure 2:   Design Fragment from Figure 1 Instantiated for a Concrete Scenario ...21

Figure 3:   Processor-Dependent Responsibilities..................................................25

Figure 4:   Parameters That Influence the Effort of a Change.................................27

Figure 5:   Design Fragment of the Break the Dependency Chain Tactic................33

Figure 6:   Allocation of Responsibilities According to the Applied Tactics ..............34




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                iii
iv   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
List of Tables



Table 1:    Parts of the Sample Concrete Performance Scenario ...........................12

Table 2:    Parts of the Derived Performance General Scenario .............................12

Table 3:    Performance Reasoning Frameworks and Their Parameters ................14

Table 4:    Tactics That Control Parameters for the Scheduling Theory’s Reasoning
            Framework ............................................................................................16

Table 5:    Example Rules from Our Performance Decision Procedure ..................17

Table 6:    Example Rules That Apply to Step 6 .....................................................18

Table 7:    Example Rules That Apply to Step 7 .....................................................19

Table 8:    Rules for Relaxing Requirements and/or Design Constraints ................20

Table 9:    Parts of the Example Concrete Modifiability Scenario ...........................24

Table 10:   Parts of the Example General Modifiability Scenario .............................24

Table 11:   Modifiability Reasoning Framework and Parameters.............................26

Table 12:   Summary of Tactics and the Parameters They Influence .......................29

Table 13:   Rules That Guide the Use of Modifiability Tactics ..................................31

Table 14:   Modifiability General-Scenario-Generation Table...................................44

Table 15:   Performance General-Scenario-Generation Table.................................45

Table 16:   Example General Scenario for Performance .........................................45




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                              v
vi   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Abstract



This is one of several reports that provide the current status on the work being done by the
Software Engineering Institute (SEISM) to understand the relationship between quality re-
quirements and architectural design. The ultimate objective of this work is to provide analy-
sis-based guidance to designers so that the quality attributes of generated designs are more
predictable and better understood.


Currently, four distinct problems must be solved to achieve that objective: (1) the precise
specification of quality attribute requirements, (2) the enumeration of architectural decisions
that can be used to achieve desired quality attribute requirements, (3) a means of coupling
one quality attribute requirement to the relevant architectural decisions, and (4) a means of
composing the relevant architectural decisions into a design. Embodying the solutions to
these four problems into a design method that is sensitive to business priorities is an addi-
tional problem. This report deals with the third problem—coupling one quality attribute re-
quirement to architectural decisions that achieve it.


This report provides initial evidence that there is, in fact, a systematic relationship between
general scenarios, concrete scenarios, architectural tactics, and design fragments. It examines,
in detail, two concrete scenarios—one for performance and one for modifiability—and de-
scribes how to move from each scenario, through tactics, to design fragments that satisfy the
scenario.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          vii
viii   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
1 Introduction



This is one of a sequence of reports [Bachmann 02, Bachmann 00] that provide the current
status of the work being done by the Software Engineering Institute (SEISM) to understand the
relationship between quality requirements and architectural design. Our ultimate objective is
to provide analysis-based guidance to designers so that the quality attributes of generated de-
signs are more predictable and better understood.


At this point, we see four distinct problems that must be solved to achieve our objective:
(1) the precise specification of quality attribute requirements, (2) the enumeration of architec-
tural decisions that can be used to achieve desired quality attribute requirements, (3) a means
of coupling one quality attribute requirement to the relevant architectural decisions, and (4) a
means of composing the relevant architectural decisions into a design. Embodying the solu-
tions to these four problems into a design method that is sensitive to business priorities is an
additional problem. This report deals with the third problem—coupling one quality attribute
requirement to architectural decisions that achieve it—while general scenarios and architec-
tural tactics address the first two problems.


In a prior report [Bass 01], we introduced the concept of general scenarios as a precise sys-
tem-independent specification of quality attribute requirements. General scenarios provide a
structured means of stating quality attribute requirements. System-specific quality attribute
requirements—called concrete scenarios—are instances of general scenarios.


We also introduced the concept of architectural tactic as a characterization of architectural
decisions that are used to achieve a desired quality attribute response. An architectural tactic
is a means of satisfying a quality-attribute-response measure (such as average latency or
mean time to failure) by manipulating some aspect of a quality attribute model (such as per-
formance queuing models or reliability Markov models) through architectural design deci-
sions.


Restating the subject of this report in terms of concrete scenarios and architectural tactics, we
are focusing on the derivation of a set of relevant architectural tactics (actually, we go further
and derive a set of design fragments) from a concrete scenario. The key idea of our approach
is that reasoning frameworks for quality attributes enable this linkage.


SM
     SEI is a service mark of Carnegie Mellon University.

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                             1
This report provides initial evidence that there is, in fact, a systematic relationship between
general scenarios, concrete scenarios, architectural tactics, and design fragments. We exam-
ine, in detail, two concrete scenarios—one for performance and one for modifiability—and
describe how to move from each scenario, through tactics, to design fragments that satisfy
that scenario.


The process of moving from concrete scenarios to design fragments is based on the following
set of relations:

•   A concrete scenario is an instance of a general scenario.
•   A general scenario contains quality attribute parameters.
•   Reasoning frameworks comprise independent and dependent quality attribute parameters
    and their relations.
•   A quality attribute model is an instance of a reasoning framework.
•   Tactics comprise reasoning framework rules and architectural design rules.

The process starts with a concrete scenario and then determines the general scenario of which
it is an instance. The general scenario contains quality attribute parameters that will point to
one (or possibly several) quality-attribute-reasoning framework (e.g., scheduling theory or
queuing theory). Reasoning frameworks comprise a set of independent and dependent pa-
rameters and their relations and thereby offer the vocabulary and analytic machinery for de-
scribing and deducing specific system properties. The concrete scenario specifies (or binds)
values for some of the parameters. Other parameters are free in the sense that they have not
yet been assigned values; free parameters become the focus of design decisions.


Making design decisions starts with developing a model (such as a scheduling or queuing
model). A quality attribute model is an instance of using a quality-attribute-reasoning frame-
work. Given the model, values for the unbound independent parameters are estimated. When
all the independent parameters have values, the value of the dependent parameter(s) can be
computed. The dependent parameter is then compared with the quality attribute requirement
specified by the concrete scenario. Tactics can be used to adjust the value of independent pa-
rameters in a manner that will satisfy the concrete scenario. When the requirement is satis-
fied, tactics can then be used to determine suitable design fragments that are consistent with
values of the parameters.


In Section 2, we repeat the key concepts from quality attribute scenarios and tactics. Next, in
Section 3, we introduce our sample domain—a garage door opener—and derive design frag-
ments for one performance and one modifiability scenario. Then, in Section 6, we take a step
back and provide a general treatment of the steps we exemplified using our two scenarios.
Section 7 provides a discussion of some problems that must be solved to compose the design
fragments and embed our solutions into a design method. Appendix A provides the general


2                                                                         CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
scenarios for performance and modifiability, and Appendix B provides the tactics for those
two attributes.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          3
4   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
2 Review of Key Concepts



We begin by reviewing three key concepts that we introduced in previous reports [Bachmann
02, Bass 01]: general scenarios, concrete scenarios, and tactics.



2.1 General and Concrete Scenarios
A general scenario is a precise system-independent specification of a type of quality attribute
requirement that consists of [Bass 03]

•   a stimulus: a condition that needs to be considered when it arrives at a system
•   a response: the activity undertaken after the arrival of the stimulus
•   a source of the stimulus: the entity (e.g., a human or computer system) that generated the
    stimulus
•   an environment: the conditions under which the stimulus occurs; for example, when the
    system is in an overload condition
•   a stimulated artifact: Some artifact is stimulated. It could be the whole system or pieces
    of it.
•   a response measure: the attribute-specific constraint that must be satisfied by the re-
    sponse

An example of a general scenario is

      A periodic event from an independent source arrives at the system under normal
      conditions. The system has to process the stimulus within certain latency.


The general scenario provides a template for a class of requirements. Appendix A discusses
general scenarios in more detail.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                              5
Ultimately, general scenarios must be changed into system-specific concrete scenarios. To
make this change, the generic vocabulary is replaced with concrete, system-specific vocabu-
lary. For example, the performance scenario shown above can be made system specific as
follows:

      An event from sensor X arrives every 10 milliseconds (ms) at a system that oper-
      ates under normal conditions. The system has to process the stimulus within 1
      ms.


System-specific quality attribute requirements can be specified using concrete scenarios.



2.2 Tactics
An architectural tactic is a means of satisfying a quality-attribute-response measure by ma-
nipulating some aspect of a quality attribute model through architectural design decisions.
This definition of tactic is different from (and we hope clearer than) our previous definition
[Bachmann 02]. We changed the definition to emphasize our reliance on quality attribute
models since that is key in this report.


The definition has the following consequences:

•   An architectural tactic bridges the quality attribute model and the architectural design. It
    does so by specifying how the parameters of a quality attribute model (the input, the in-
    dependent variables, and the properties of the model’s elements) can be controlled
    through architectural decisions to achieve a desired response measure. This means that an
    architectural tactic represents codified knowledge about the relationship between archi-
    tectural decisions and quality attribute parameters.
•   An architectural tactic uses knowledge from various reasoning frameworks (such as
    scheduling theory and queuing theory) to operationalize the creation of quality attribute
    models (such as scheduling and queuing models) that mirror the architecture being de-
    signed. As such, when we use the term quality attribute model, we mean an instance of
    using a reasoning framework to predict and control the quality attribute behavior of the
    developing architecture.

At this time, we do not have a complete outline of a tactic description. That will be included
in a later report. Nevertheless, throughout this report, we point out important information that
needs to be captured in a tactic description.




6                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
We discuss performance and modifiability tactics in more detail in Appendix B. An example
of a performance tactic is

      Reduce the computational overhead. Computational work usually requires oper-
      ating-system (OS) and middleware services to manage process interaction,
      communications, and the like. One important parameter in many performance
      models (such as queuing and scheduling models) is execution time—one source
      of which is overhead. The purpose of this tactic is to highlight one place where
      execution time is manifested in architectural designs.


An example of a modifiability tactic is

      Hide information. This tactic is based on dividing a module’s responsibilities into
      two categories: public and private. Public responsibilities are those that are visi-
      ble from both inside and outside the module. Private responsibilities are those
      that are visible only from inside the modules. The goal of this tactic is to limit
      the public responsibilities and make them visible through an interface. A parame-
      ter of a modifiability model is the dependency relations among the modules. The
      purpose of this tactic is to highlight one technique for breaking some dependency
      relations.


Tactics are not necessarily independent. The application of one tactic may assume that an-
other tactic has already been applied. For example, the application of the Determine the ap-
propriate scheduling strategy tactic assumes that logical concurrency exists in the system.
The application of one tactic may also require additional tactics to be applied. For example,
applying the Break the dependency chain tactic to insert an intermediary would likely require
additional tactics to isolate that intermediary’s responsibilities.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          7
8   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
3 Garage Door Example



Our sample design problem is that of a garage door opener. The controller for a garage door
opener is an embedded real-time system that reacts to “open” and “close” commands from
several buttons installed in the house and from a remote control unit, usually located in a car.
The controller then controls the speed and direction of the motor, which opens and closes the
garage door. The controller also reacts to signals from several sensors attached to the garage
door. One of those sensors detects resistance to the door’s movement. If the amount of resis-
tance measured by this sensor is above a certain limit, the controller interprets that resistance
as an obstacle between the garage door and the floor. As a reaction, the motor closing the ga-
rage door is stopped.


Many scenarios specify the requirements for the controller software. For the remainder of this
report, we focus on two specific concrete scenarios—the performance and modifiability sce-
narios shown below.

1.   Performance scenario: If an obstacle (person or object) is detected by the garage door
     during descent, the door must halt within 0.1 seconds.
2.   Modifiability scenario: The processor (central processing unit [CPU]) used in different
     products differs. Adaptation of the software to those different processors should be done
     within one person-day.

In the following sections, we show the relation of the above concrete scenarios to a collection
of design fragments that supports the achievement of the desired response measures. Each
derivation of a concrete scenario to a design fragment follows the steps below. In Sections 4
and 5, these steps are described for use with performance and modifiability scenarios, respec-
tively.

1.   Pick a concrete scenario.
2.   Type-check the concrete scenario.
3.   Identify candidate reasoning frameworks.
4.   Determine the bound and free parameters.
5.   Determine the tactics associated with the free parameters.
6.   Assign the free parameters an initial set of values.



CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                             9
7.   Select tactics and apply them to the bound values to achieve the required response meas-
     ure.
8.   Allocate responsibilities to the architectural elements of the design fragments that are
     associated with the selected tactics.

Steps 1 and 2 are scenario dependent and provide information for subsequent steps. Steps 3,
4, and 5 are intended to set up the model in the reasoning framework; they identify the pa-
rameters that can be manipulated to satisfy the scenario response. Steps 6 and 7 are intended
to solve the model set up in Steps 3, 4, and 5. Step 8 translates the tactics used into design
fragments.




10                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
4 Scenario 1: Performance Scenario to a
  Design Fragment



Our starting point is the following performance scenario:


        If an obstacle (person or object) is detected by the garage door during de-
        scent, the door must halt within 0.1 seconds.



4.1 Step 1: Pick a Concrete Scenario
These steps are intended to be applied in the context of a design method. One thing the de-
sign method must specify is some procedure for choosing the scenario or scenarios for which
design fragments are to be derived next. For this report, we assume this is the only scenario
to consider.



4.2 Step 2: Type-Check the Concrete Scenario
Often, the concrete scenario is not well formed (by our definition of general scenario). Many
items are implicit in a particular context and will not be presented in a requirement. Type-
checking means ensuring that the concrete scenario contains all the parts of a well-formed
scenario and that each part has a valid value as defined by the general-scenario-generation
tables in Appendix A. Two important outcomes of type-checking a concrete scenario are
(1) identifying the general scenario of which the concrete scenario is an instance and (2) iden-
tifying an initial set of responsibilities.


To determine the associated general scenario, we divide the concrete scenario into its con-
stituent parts. The parts of the concrete scenario we’re using are listed in Table 1.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           11
Table 1:    Parts of the Sample Concrete Performance Scenario

               Part Name             Value
               source                not defined
               stimulus              obstacle (person or object) is detected
               environment           during descent
               artifact              by the garage door system
               response              The door must halt.
               response measure      within 0.1 seconds

The values given for the scenario parts map to the values provided by the general perform-
ance scenarios. One value is the arrival distribution, which describes how often an obstacle is
detected. Because we can assume this happens infrequently, there is a bound on how fre-
quently it can occur (known as a sporadic arrival distribution). Another parameter is the dead-
line, which is .1 seconds from when the obstacle is detected.


Comparing the values, we can derive the general scenario described in Table 2.


Table 2:    Parts of the Derived Performance General Scenario

               Part Name             Value
               source                one of a number of independent sources
               stimulus              sporadic events arrive
               environment           normal conditions
               artifact              system
               response              processes stimuli
               response measure      deadline

Note that the general scenario provides the type of information, while the concrete scenario
provides the values. Using the general scenario, we could also assign a value to the source
part, which was not described in the concrete scenario. The source would be something like
“the obstacle-detection sensor.”




12                                                                      CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Casting the quality attribute requirement as a concrete scenario provides a natural method for
identifying some of the initial responsibilities of the garage door opener. Performance general
scenarios help the user to determine the following three responsibilities:

1.   detect <from a stimulus>
2.   determine <from the environment>
3.   carry out <from the response>

These responsibilities come into play in Step 8: “Allocate responsibilities to the architectural
elements of the design fragments that are associated with the selected tactics.”


In our example, the responsibilities of the garage door opener are to

•    Detect the obstacle.
•    Determine that the garage door is descending.
•    Halt the garage door.


4.3 Step 3: Identify Candidate Reasoning Frameworks
For modifiability and performance, we intend to construct tables such as Table 3 below. For
each response measure, Table 3 identifies a reasoning framework (or possibly frameworks)
that will be useful for satisfying the response measure. The table identifies important parame-
ters of the reasoning framework. For example, given “hard deadline” as a response measure,
the table tells us that scheduling theory will be useful. It also tells us that scheduling theory
uses the following independent parameters to determine the dependent parameter for worst-
case latency: execution times, arrival distributions, the number of units of concurrency, the
priority of each unit of concurrency, and the number of processors. Worst-case latency is
compared with the deadline to determine if that type of response measure (i.e., deadlines) is
satisfied. This table can also help to determine which tactics are applicable for a particular
scenario; recall that the purpose of tactics is to manipulate the independent parameters in a
manner that will satisfy the response measure.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           13
Table 3:      Performance Reasoning Frameworks and Their Parameters

 Reasoning         Quality                  Independent                   Dependent      Response
 Framework        Attribute                  Parameters                   Parameter      Measure

 Scheduling     Performance    • Execution times (with relatively        Worst-case     Hard-deadline
 theory                           low variability) of units of concur-   latency        requirement
                                  rency
                               • Arrival distribution (a.k.a., period,
                                  with relatively low variability) of
                                  units of concurrency
                               • Number of units of concurrency
                               • Priority of each unit of concur-
                                  rency
                               • Number of processors
 Queuing        Performance    • Execution-time distribution asso-       Average-case   Soft-deadline
 theory                           ciated with servicing event            latency        requirement
                                  streams                                Average        Data loss
                               • Arrival distribution of event           queue depth    requirement
                                  streams
                               • Number of event streams
                               • Number of servers

We know from looking at our concrete scenario that we have sporadic event arrivals and a
hard-deadline requirement. That requirement suggests that the applicable reasoning frame-
work is likely to be scheduling theory. Sporadic arrivals are arrivals that cannot occur arbi-
trarily and often. They indicate a bound on the arrival rate variability, again showing that
scheduling theory might be relevant. The other relevant parameters include execution time,
the number of units of concurrency, the priority of each unit, and the number of processors.
The response measure is the deadline.


We have not yet considered the problem of choosing between several suitable reasoning
frameworks. Although we suspect that if several reasoning frameworks have the same
independent and dependent parameters, they are probably equivalent.



4.4 Step 4: Determine the Bound and Free Parameters
In this step, we determine the bound and free parameters of the applicable reasoning frame-
work. Scheduling theory is concerned with calculating the worst-case latency associated with
carrying out each scenario, given the execution time, arrival period, and priority associated
with each unit of concurrency; the number of units of concurrency; and how each unit is allo-
cated to one or more processors.


14                                                                            CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
From our type-checking, we know that the arrival distribution is sporadic with an occurrence
of one (within some reasonable time bound), and so the arrival distribution parameter is
fixed. Design constraints can also bind parameters. For example, the business case of the de-
veloper of the garage door opener’s software might dictate that only a single processor is
used in the garage door. Thus, the “number of processors” parameter is also fixed.


To summarize, bound parameters include

•   arrival distribution
•   number of processors

And free parameters include

•   number of units of concurrency
•   priority of each unit of concurrency
•   execution time of responsibilities


4.5 Step 5: Determine the Tactics Associated with the
    Free Parameters
The objective of this step is to determine which tactics are applicable to the free parameters
identified in the previous step. We intend to construct tables such as Table 4 that relate inde-
pendent parameters of a reasoning framework to the tactics that affect them.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           15
Table 4:       Tactics That Control Parameters for the Scheduling Theory’s Reasoning
               Framework
Parameter                         Tactic That Affects It
execution times                   Tactics for Managing Demand
                                  Reduce computational overhead
                                  Bound execution times
                                  Control the demand for resources
                                  Increase the computational efficiency of algorithms
arrival distribution              Tactics for Managing Demand
                                  Manage the event rate
                                  Control the frequency of sampling external events
                                  Bound queue sizes
number of units of                Tactics for Arbitrating Demand
concurrency                       Increase logical concurrency
                                  Determine appropriate scheduling policy
priority of each unit of          Tactic for Arbitrating Demand
concurrency                       Determine appropriate scheduling policy
number of processors              Tactics for Managing Multiple Resources
                                  Increase physical concurrency
                                  Balance resource allocation

We also assume that a decision procedure is associated with each reasoning framework. This
procedure is a set of rules governing which tactics are relevant in particular situations. Table
5 through Table 7 provide a sampling of the rules in a decision procedure for scheduling the-
ory.1 The decisions are based strictly on which parameters are considered to be bound and
which are considered to be free:

1.    Which parameters are bound?
       • arrival distribution: Arrivals are infrequent.
       • number of processors: A single processor is being used.

      From the first rule in Table 5, we conclude that the bounded arrival distribution rules out
      the following tactics: Manage event rate and Control the frequency of sampling external
      events.

      The single-processor constraint rules out the following tactics: Increase physical concur-
      rency and Balance resource allocation.
2.    Which parameters are free?
       •    execution time: The responsibilities will suggest a likely range, but this is not yet
            fixed.


1
     An important aspect of this ongoing work is to flesh out the set of rules.

16                                                                                 CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
      •    number of units of concurrency: The value of this parameter will be determined
           later.
      •    priority of each unit of concurrency: The value of this parameter will be deter-
           mined later.

     The following tactics are concerned with manipulating execution time: Reduce computa-
     tional overhead, Increase computation efficiency, Control the demand for resources, and
     Bound execution time.

Three rules from our performance decision procedure that are applicable for this step are
shown in Table 5.


Table 5:     Example Rules from Our Performance Decision Procedure

•   If the arrival distribution is bounded, the Manage event rate and Control the frequency of
    sampling external events tactics cannot be used to control worst-case latency.
•   If execution time is a free parameter, consider using the following tactics: Reduce compu-
    tational overhead, Increase computation efficiency, Control the demand for resources,
    and Bound execution time.
•   If the number of processors is bound, eliminate the following tactics as candidates: In-
    crease physical concurrency and Balance resource allocation.



4.6 Step 6: Assign the Free Parameters an Initial Set
    of Values
Two things occur during this step. First, the architect offers his/her best guess for values of
the free parameters. The list of applicable tactics suggests factors that impact the setting of
these values. Second, the decision procedure rules call attention to possibly problematic
situations.


From the previous steps, we know that three of the tactics are relevant to estimating execu-
tion time: Reduce computational overhead, Improve computational efficiency, and Bound
execution time. The architect might guess that the sum of the sensor’s execution time for
physically detecting an obstacle, plus the execution time of the three responsibilities associ-
ated with obstacle detection and halting is about 5 ms. The Bound execution time tactic calls
our attention to the effects of execution-time variability. However, we predict that these re-
sponsibilities have very little variability. The Improve computational efficiency tactic calls
our attention to the particular algorithm used to detect that an obstacle exists. The Reduce
computational overhead tactic calls our attention to various sources of overhead that repre-
sent extra execution time. It is conceivable that each responsibility mentioned above (i.e.,
detect obstacle, determine that the garage door is descending, and halt the garage door) incur
some OS overhead for some preselected real-time OS. Consequently, we estimate that the OS

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                               17
adds an additional 1 ms of overhead. Since this is the only scenario being considered, we can
assume that this scenario’s responsibilities are all allocated to a single unit of concurrency.
This assumption may change in the future as we consider multiple scenarios and deal with
already-made design decisions—but for now, our assumption is adequate.


While we don’t yet know all the details of the other responsibilities in the system, we do
know that other responsibilities with associated execution times will exist. If we’re not care-
ful, those responsibilities could potentially have an adverse effect on the ability of this sce-
nario to be realized. We are not yet ready to assign values to their associated execution times.


The second consideration at this stage is to examine the scenario to determine if it is unrea-
sonable or problematic. For example, if execution times or arrival rates vary considerably and
deadlines can never be missed, problems might arise. Examples of rules that call attention to
such potentially problematic situations are shown in Table 6. However, none of these situa-
tions applies to the current scenario.


Three rules from our performance decision procedure that are applicable for this step are
shown in Table 6.


Table 6:     Example Rules That Apply to Step 6

•    If the scenario has a hard-deadline-response requirement that cannot be relaxed, and if
     arrivals can occur arbitrarily close to one another, use one of the following tactics to en-
     sure a lower bound on the interarrival interval: Manage event rate and Control sampling
     frequency.
•    If the scenario has a hard-deadline-response requirement that cannot be relaxed, and if
     execution times vary considerably to the point that they can approach or exceed the hard
     deadline, consider applying the Bound execution time tactic.
•    If either of the above “unbounded” conditions applies, but arrival rate and execution time
     are bound parameters, declare the requirement untenable.



4.7 Step 7: Select Tactics and Apply Them to the
    Bind Values to Achieve the Required Response
    Measure
At this point, all the parameters have values, and we have a candidate list of applicable tac-
tics. The first thing we need to do is to calculate the value of the dependent parameters, given
the current values of the independent parameters, to determine whether the response measure
can be met.




18                                                                          CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Without considering the effects of other responsibilities, the model in this case is fairly sim-
ple. The only contributors to latency are execution time and overhead, 5 ms and 1 ms, respec-
tively. Their sum is well under the deadline of 100 ms (i.e., .1 seconds), leaving 94 ms to
spare. On the other hand, it is very conceivable that the other responsibilities in the system
combined take more than 94 ms.


Four rules from our performance decision procedure that are applicable for Step 7 are shown
in Table 7. The last rule in Table 7 suggests that the design decisions we make in Step 8 be
consistent with our simple model—that is, they should ensure that the latency associated with
this scenario’s responsibilities is not affected by any other responsibilities.


Table 7:    Example Rules That Apply to Step 7

•   If the execution time associated with the arrival is close to the deadline, consider reduc-
    ing the execution time by using the following tactics: Reduce overhead, Bound execution
    time, and/or Increase computation efficiency.
•   If the difference between the worst and best case is significant, review the following tac-
    tics and apply their modeling techniques to assess the miss rates and average latency,
    respectively: Bound execution times and/or Bound queue sizes.
•   If the response requirement for all scenarios can be achieved even with the worst-case
    delay due to the other responsibilities of the other scenarios, do one of the following:
    −   Allocate responsibilities to one of the existing units of concurrency using the Offline
        scheduling tactic.

    −   Allocate responsibilities to a new unit of concurrency using the Increase logical con-
        currency and Time-based scheduling tactics.

•   If the current scenario cannot suffer the worst-case delay due to the other responsibili-
    ties, consider them to be time sensitive and use the following tactics to create an appro-
    priate scheduling policy: Offline scheduling, Time-based scheduling (such as deadline
    monotonic scheduling), and/or Increase logical concurrency.

The next thing we need to do is to look at one or more of the applicable tactics to determine
which parameters can be adjusted to satisfy the concrete scenario.


The relevant tactics entering into this step include

•   Controlling resource demand through the Control the demand for resources and Bound
    execution time tactics assumes that multiple events are occurring. Our scenario is only
    concerned with a single event (i.e., obstacle detected).
•   The Reduce computational overhead and Increase computational efficiency tactics both
    affect the latency. The computational overhead for this scenario comes from the OS
    choice. Unless the scenario is unachievable (which is not yet the case), we do not want to
    change that choice. Increasing the computational efficiency of the obstacle detection al-

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                             19
     gorithm would save possibly 1 ms. Applying the reasoning framework with this new exe-
     cution-time value shows that the execution time does not have much impact.2
•    The Increase logical concurrency and Determine scheduling policy tactics together en-
     able the satisfactory achievement of the response measure. For this reason, we carry these
     tactics forward into the next step.

Up to now in this step, tactics have been used to set and/or adjust model parameters to satisfy
the current concrete scenario’s response measure. However, the scenario might pose an un-
tenable requirement, or the collection of scenarios considered up to this point might be unten-
able in aggregate. If either situation occurs, tactics should offer some ideas for how to relax
the requirements or design constraints.


Two rules from our performance decision procedure that are useful for identify and relaxing
requirements and/or design constraints are shown in Table 8.


Table 8:       Rules for Relaxing Requirements and/or Design Constraints

•    If the response requirement is specified as a hard deadline, but limited misses can be
     tolerated, recharacterize deadlines as follows:

     −    firm deadlines: Completing the responses before the deadline is very important.
          Missing the deadline can be tolerated occasionally. A specific bound on the miss rate
          needs to be specified.

     −    soft deadlines: In this case, the term deadline is a misnomer. The average-latency
          requirement needs to be specified.

•    If the time-sensitive set of responsibilities is not schedulable, incorporate a notion of im-
     portance-based scheduling to handle overload situations using the Semantic-importance-
     based scheduling tactic, or add more resources using the Increase physical concurrency
     tactic.



4.8 Step 8: Allocate Responsibilities to the Architec-
    tural Elements of the Design Fragments That Are
    Associated with the Selected Tactics
We assume that a design fragment is associated with each tactic. The fragment associated
with the Increase logical concurrency and Determine scheduling policy tactics is shown in
Figure 1. This design fragment shows two threads, one of which has a higher priority than the


2
     This example points out the importance of understanding how sensitive the reasoning framework is to the
     various parameters. For example, knowing the impact of halving the value of a parameter tells the architect
     how much effort to spend on that type of improvement. If the impact is small, little effort is justified; if the
     impact is large, more effort is justified.

20                                                                                         CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
other. The fragment rules call attention to the existence of a scheduler (not shown in Figure 1)
whose responsibilities must be allocated to some module in the system.



             Responsibilities related                     Other application
             to the deadline                              responsibilities
                                        Have a higher
                                        priority than


                                                                          Key

                                                                               thread     relation




Figure 1: Design Fragment Associated with the Increase Logical Concurrency and
          Determine Scheduling Policy Tactics

The generic responsibilities in the design fragment shown in Figure 1 are instantiated with
the values derived from type-checking and result in the design fragment shown in Figure 2.



              Obstacle detection
                                                           Other application
              responsibilities + OS
                                                           responsibilities
              responsibilities
                                        Have a higher
                                        priority than


                                                                              Key

                                                                                 thread     relation




Figure 2: Design Fragment from Figure 1 Instantiated for a Concrete Scenario

Observe the relationship between the design fragment and the associated analysis model. The
model states that obstacle detection responsibilities must be scheduled with a priority higher
than that of other responsibilities. The model also identified the OS responsibilities as a por-
tion of the obstacle detection responsibilities.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                    21
22   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
5 Scenario 2: Modifiability Scenario to a
  Design Fragment



Modifiability is the degree to which an architectural design can be modified easily in the fu-
ture. We want to design an architecture that is prepared for certain modifications.


To determine the possible tactics for modifiability, we follow the same steps listed in Section
3 and assume that we are designing based solely on the modifiability scenario.



5.1 Step 1: Pick a Concrete Scenario
Our modifiability scenario is


        The processor (CPU) used in different products differs. Adaptation of the
        software to the different processors should be done within one person-day.


This scenario describes a requirement that typically occurs when building a product line. By
processor, we mean only the physical hardware and not the software platform associated with
it. Any platform considerations will be included in the software we design.



5.2 Step 2: Type-Check the Concrete Scenarios
In this step, we map the concrete scenario to the associated general scenario for modifiability.
To create that general scenario, we divide the concrete scenario into its constituent parts as
shown in Table 9.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          23
Table 9:      Parts of the Example Concrete Modifiability Scenario

                   Part Name                   Value
                   source                      not defined
                   stimulus                    change processors (CPUs)
                   environment                 not defined
                   artifact                    garage door system
                   response                    adaptation to different processors
                   response measure            within one person-day

The values given for the scenario parts map to the values provided in the general-scenario-
generation table (see Appendix A). Comparing the values and filling in the unspecified fields,
we can derive the general scenario shown in Table 10.


Table 10: Parts of the Example General Modifiability Scenario

                   Part Name                 Value
                   source                    developer
                   stimulus                  wants to add/delete/modify/change
                                             functionality
                   environment               compile time
                   artifact                  system
                   response                  makes modification without affecting
                                             other functionality
                   response measure          effort

The concrete scenario mentions two sets of responsibilities.3 One set includes all the respon-
sibilities assigned to the processor (from the stimulus table entry); the other includes all the
responsibilities of the software (from the artifact table entry). The responsibilities of the
processor will change, and we have to make sure that the effect on the responsibilities of the
software is within the limits stated in the concrete scenario (one person-day). We represent
this relationship in Figure 3.




3
     We treat the processor as though it implements certain responsibilities. Although this may seem somewhat
     strange and blurs the line between hardware and software, it allows us to treat hardware modifications as
     software modifications.

24                                                                                    CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Figure 3: Processor-Dependent Responsibilities



5.3 Step 3: Identify Candidate Reasoning Frameworks
The reasoning frameworks for modifiability are not as precise as those for performance. The
important question the reasoning framework needs to answer is “how much will it cost to
make a certain change?”


The answer to this question is typically stated in terms of effort or time. In this case we are
concerned with return on investment. Preparing an architecture to support a certain type of
change requires an investment in terms of effort. The following basic formula shows what
should be achieved:


                  ei ≤ e s with e s = n (e n − e w )

where

•   ei is the effort to prepare the architecture for a certain change (investment).
•   es is the effort saved because the architecture was prepared for the change.
•   en is the effort used to make a change for which the architecture was not prepared.
•   e w is the effort for making the change in the prepared architecture.
•   n is the number of times this type of change occurs during the lifetime of the architecture.

Basically, the relation states that the savings should be greater than or equal to the invest-
ment. The efforts for making a change ( en and e w ) depend on several factors, such as effort
for

•   finding affected responsibilities
•   adapting the responsibilities

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                               25
•     testing all the responsibilities within a changed module
•     testing all the responsibilities of the modules that depend on the adapted module

The complete effort E for making this type of change n times during the lifetime of the
software, given that the architecture is prepared for this type of change, is the sum of the ef-
forts required for every change plus the investment efforts:

                         n
           E = ei + ∑ e wi
                        i =1

A particular organization may choose to be influenced by either of the two formulae pre-
sented. The initial formula suggests that architecting software to be modifiable may be
worthwhile only if this up-front cost can be amortized over some number of future modifica-
tions. The second formula suggests that it is important to track the total cost of modification.
If an organization wants to stay in a particular market, it may not matter how expensive a
change is. If an organization has both limited developers and limited time to react to a change
request (e.g., from an important customer), the initial investment may not be as important as
the cost (time) of any particular change.


Table 11 shows the main parameters influencing the efforts of making a change.


Table 11: Modifiability Reasoning Framework and Parameters

     Reasoning         Quality        Independent Parameters                Dependent      Response
     Framework        Attribute                                             Parameters     Measure


    Dependency     Modifiability    • number of primary modules         Effort for        Cost con-
    analysis                          affected by the change            making a          straint
                                    • number of responsibilities        change
                                      within the primary modules            ew )
                                                                        (
                                      affected
                                    • probability that publicly visi-
                                      ble responsibilities of a pri-
                                      mary module are affected
                                    • number of secondary mod-
                                      ules that depend on the
                                      changed publicly visible re-
                                      sponsibilities of a primary
                                      module
                                    • number of responsibilities
                                      within the secondary mod-
                                      ules affected



26                                                                                 CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Figure 4 illustrates those parameters. A change affects several responsibilities in one or more
modules. If publicly visible responsibilities are affected, most likely one or more other re-
sponsibilities in one or more other modules are affected. Keep in mind that each affected re-
sponsibility comes with the costs of finding, changing, and testing it.




Figure 4: Parameters That Influence the Effort of a Change

If secondary modules are affected by a change, this list has to be applied recursively, where
the secondary modules become primary modules.



5.4 Step 4: Determine the Bound and Free Parameters
Since we are only considering one scenario, the reasoning framework contains the responsi-
bilities as shown in Figure 3. We consider two modules—the processor and the garage door
opener software—which both depend on the processor. The modifiability scenario states that
the processor will be replaced by another one, meaning that potentially all the processor’s
responsibilities are changed.


An examination of the differences between an existing processor and the new processor will
reveal the responsibilities, especially the publicly visible ones that will be added, removed, or
modified when using the new processor. The result of the examination binds the number of
responsibilities affected in the processor.

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           27
Examining the affected responsibilities if they are used by the garage door opener software
determines the ratio between public and private responsibilities and therefore binds the
“probability that publicly visible responsibilities are affected” parameter. In our case, we set
the value of that parameter to 1 because we know that changing the processor will affect at
least 1 visible responsibility. We therefore consider this parameter to be fixed. Furthermore,
since all the responsibilities of the processor that affect the software are public, the probabil-
ity that publicly visible responsibilities of the processor are affected is 1.


The “number of primary modules affected” parameter is also set to 1. The garage door opener
will be a single-processor application.


Therefore, we have the following values for these bound parameters:

•    primary modules affected by the change (1—the processor)
•    responsibilities changed (processor responsibilities)
•    probability that publicly visible responsibilities of the processor are affected (1)

And we have the free parameter “number of secondary modules that depend on the changed
publicly visible responsibilities” for which a value must be assigned.



5.5 Step 5: Determine the Tactics Associated with the
    Free Parameters
From the parameters listed above and in Table 11, we see that the following tactics are asso-
ciated with the free parameters:

•    Limit options
•    Break the dependency chain
•    Limit communication paths
•    Make data self-identifying

The last two tactics—Limit communication paths and Make data self-identifying—are not
feasible given that we have no control over the processor hardware.


Furthermore, the Break the dependency chain tactic involves introducing an intermediary,
which may, in turn, require restricting the visibility of the intermediary’s responsibilities us-
ing the following tactics:

•    Hide information
•    Raise the abstraction level


28                                                                          CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
•   Maintain existing interfaces
•   Separate the interface from the implementation

Using any of the tactics mentioned in Table 12 contributes to the investment costs ei . Only
the Limit options tactic would actually limit the investment costs because it reduces the num-
ber of changes the architecture must be able to accommodate.


Table 12: Summary of Tactics and the Parameters They Influence
Parameter                           Tactic That Affects It
number of occurrences of a          Tactics for Localizing Expected Modifications
change                              Limit options (The fewer the possible options, the less often a
                                    change occurs.)
number of primary modules           Tactics for Localizing Expected Modifications
affected by a change                Limit options (The fewer the possible options, the less often a
                                    change occurs and the less modules are affected.)
                                    Isolate the expected change (Separate what is likely to change
                                    from parts that are unlikely to change.)
                                    Maintain semantic coherence (Put together parts that have strong
                                    dependencies on each other so they are easier to find.)
number of responsibilities of the   Tactics for Localizing Expected Modifications
primary modules affected by the     Abstract common services in the primary modules (Only a limited
change                              number of services is affected.)
                                    Limit options (The fewer the possible options, the fewer responsi-
                                    bilities are affected.)
probability that a change to a      Tactics for Localizing Expected Modifications
primary module becomes visible      Limit options (The fewer possible the options, the fewer responsi-
outside that module                 bilities are affected.)
                                    Raise the abstraction level (The more abstract a service is, the
                                    more possible it will be that changes can be supported invisibly.)
                                    Tactics for Restricting the Visibility of Responsibilities
                                    Hide information (The more responsibilities are private, the less
                                    likely a change becomes visible.)
                                    Maintain existing interfaces (Changes become visible only through
                                    new interfaces.)
                                    Separate the interface from the implementation (New behavior can
                                    be introduced with a low probability of making it visible.)
number of secondary modules         Tactics for Preventing the Ripple Affect
affected by a publicly visible      Break the dependency chain (Intermediaries of different types
change                              block different types of dependencies from propagating.)
                                    Make the data self-identifying (Tagging data with syntax informa-
                                    tion enables secondary modules to adjust automatically.)
                                    Limit communication paths (The fewer the dependencies, the fewer
                                    secondary modules are affected.)




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                     29
5.6 Step 6: Assign the Free Parameters an Initial Set
    of Values
In our example, we must set initial values for the

•    number of secondary modules that depend on the changed publicly visible responsibili-
     ties of a primary module
•    number of responsibilities in the secondary module(s) that are affected

The number of secondary modules affected is set to 1. However the number of affected re-
sponsibilities in the secondary module is likely to be significant. With those initial values,
e w will most likely be much higher than the required cost constraint (one person-day).



5.7 Step 7: Select Tactics and Apply Them to the
    Bind Values to Achieve the Required Response
    Measure
We now apply the tactics from our list of candidate tactics (see Section 5.5) until we achieve
a satisfying result. The procedure is based on the set of rules shown in Table 13. These rules
guide the use of modifiability tactics.


In this case, the Limit options tactic asks whether all possible processors are to be supported.
If they can be limited to a subset (such as those that belong to the same family of processors),
designing for change is much simpler, but involves trading off possible market share.


In our example, restricting processors to be in the same family might reduce n to ≤ 5. It also
might reduce the probability that a change in the processor becomes visible to the software.
Let us assume that in our example only every other supported processor has different publicly
visible responsibilities. This means that at least in every other case we can keep the efforts
e w lower than requested by the scenario.

Since we do not change the responsibilities of the processor (because we buy it), we skip
rules 2, 3, and 4 because they require changing the responsibilities of the primary affected
modules. We therefore proceed to rule 5.




30                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Table 13: Rules That Guide the Use of Modifiability Tactics

1.   If the number of occurrences of the change can be modified, apply the Limit options
     tactic.
2.   If it is impossible to achieve the change within the specified limits when only considering
     the primary affected modules, apply the following tactics:
      • Maintain semantic coherence
      • Isolate the expected change
3.   If the change can’t be achieved within the specified limits when only the primary affected
     modules are considered and after the tactics in rules 1 and 2 have been applied, it is an
     unsolvable problem.
4.   If the effort required to adapt the affected secondary modules is not within the specified
     limits and the primary modules can be changed, apply the following tactics to the affected
     primary modules:
      • Abstract common services in the primary modules
      • Raise the abstraction level
      • Hide information
      • Maintain existing interfaces
      • Separate the interface from the implementation
5.   If the effort required to adapt the affected secondary modules is not within the specified
     limits, apply the following tactics:
      • Break the dependency chain
     • Make the data self-identifying
     • Limit communication paths
6.   If it is impossible to achieve the change within the specified limits after all tactics have
     been applied, it is an unsolvable problem.
7.   If the investment costs of using the tactics are lower than the possible gain, reconsider
     the requirement.

Rule 5 leads to use of the Break the dependency chain tactic. We therefore have to determine
which type of dependencies between the primary and secondary modules should and should
not be allowed. Between the garage door opener software and the processor, we have the fol-
lowing dependencies:

1.   data syntax and semantics: The language required to instruct the processor to execute is
     data for the processor. Using an intermediary means the language used is not assembler
     language.
2.   service syntax and semantics: The garage door opener also uses services provided by the
     processor, such as memory management, input/output (I/O) handling, timer manage-
     ment, and so forth.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                 31
3.   sequence of data and control: The software depends on the sequence in which the in-
     structions (data) are executed by the processor. It may also depend to some degree on the
     sequencing of control within the processor (e.g., interrupt handling).
4.   interface identity: The software is loaded onto the processor in which it executes and
     therefore does not have to know the interface identity of the processor.
5.   runtime location: The software is loaded onto the processor in which it executes and
     therefore does not have to know the processor’s location.
6.   quality of service: This dependency might exist for services the processor provides (e.g.,
     I/O services, processor speed).
7.   existence: The software depends on the existence of the processor.
8.   resource behavior: The software depends on how the processor executes the instruction,
     especially timing behavior.

To achieve the required efforts stated in the concrete scenario, almost all the dependencies
have to be broken. It is very unlikely that the software will not be loaded on the processor in
which it executes. Therefore, the interface identity, runtime location, and existence of the
processor will not change, and we will not try to break those dependencies. We also assume
that a resource behavior dependency will always exist on the processor.


5.7.1 Using a Compiler as an Intermediary
We can break the data syntax dependencies by introducing a higher language than assembler
language. We assume that a compiler for the processor and language we chose exists. The
compiler also alleviates the semantic dependencies because it supports the use of a more ab-
stract language and breaks the dependency on data sequencing.


Usually, a compiler also comes with a runtime environment that acts as an intermediary for
some services provided by the processor. Standard I/O services, memory management, and
time management are examples of services provided by a runtime environment.


This breaks the service syntax dependencies to the supported processor services. Also, the
semantic dependencies are reduced because the runtime environment usually provides a more
generic interface to the services.


5.7.2 Using an OS as an Intermediary
We still have dependencies in our software on services not concealed by a compiler. Exam-
ples include I/O with special devices that manage special memory such as flash memory. To
break those dependencies, we use an intermediary that is or acts as an OS. This intermediary



32                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
breaks the service syntax and resource behavior dependencies on the remaining processor
services, as well as reduces the semantic dependencies.


When defining the responsibilities of the intermediary, using the Raise the abstraction level
and Hide information tactics provides a more abstract interface to the processor’s services
and hides all processor-dependent details.


When use of the rules in Table 13 reveals that the problem is unsolvable, the only way to
come to a solution is to change one or more of the parameters that were fixed by the scenar-
ios. Perhaps some of the requirements are not as important as stated, or the acceptable efforts
for doing the change can actually be higher than previously thought.


After one or more fixed parameters are changed, the rules can be applied again, and hopefully
a possible solution can be found.



5.8 Step 8: Allocate Responsibilities to the Architec-
    tural Elements of the Design Fragments That Are
    Associated with the Selected Tactics
The Break the dependency chain tactic has the design fragment shown in Figure 5.

  Secondary                           intermediary                       Primary
  responsibilities                                                       responsibilities

Figure 5: Design Fragment of the Break the Dependency Chain Tactic

Applying this design fragment three times and assigning the responsibilities according to the
tactics used lead to the design fragment shown in Figure 6. Most of the direct dependencies
are now broken. The remaining dependencies of the garage door opener on the processor
(e.g., location or existence) are those which probably won’t be affected by changing the proc-
essor.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                         33
Figure 6: Allocation of Responsibilities According to the Applied Tactics

Changing the processor will affect the compiler and the runtime environment (which we can
buy with the new processor), as well as the OS-like intermediary, which needs to be adapted
to the new processor.


None of the responsibilities in the garage door opener modules should be affected by the
processor change.




34                                                                     CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
6 Coupling Concrete Scenarios to Design
  Fragments



Our goal in this report is to provide initial evidence that it is possible to derive design frag-
ments from concrete scenarios. Our two example scenarios provided some limited evidence.
In this section, we take a step back and treat the problem in general. That is, what is the gen-
eral procedure for deriving design fragments from concrete scenarios? We have already seen
some elements of this procedure (Steps 1-8). However, in addition to discussing these steps in
general, we discuss the assets we assume will be available before any particular system is
examined.



6.1 Assets Available
We assume that some set of assets is available prior to examining any particular set of con-
crete scenarios. These assets might be codified in an engineering handbook, embodied in a
design assistant tool, and/or made available to the designer in some other form. These assets
include

•   general-scenario-generation tables: (see Appendix A) tables that provide valid “values”
    for each portion of a general scenario for various attributes (such as performance,
    modifiability, reliability, security, and usability)
•   mapping from a general scenario to reasoning frameworks: A general scenario for a par-
    ticular quality attribute contains enough information to identify some of the key parame-
    ters that must be reasoned about when designing an architecture to satisfy that attribute.
    By identifying those quality attribute parameters, the general scenario suggests reasoning
    frameworks (such as queuing theory) that might be applicable. At the most basic level,
    performance scenarios (which reference stimuli in terms of event arrival rates and re-
    sponse measures in terms of latency) suggest performance reasoning frameworks (such
    as scheduling theory or queuing theory); modifiability scenarios suggest modifiability
    reasoning frameworks, and so forth.

    A reasoning framework includes a list of independent parameters, a list of dependent pa-
    rameters, and a means of deducing the value of a dependent variable when given the val-
    ues of independent variables. Once a suitable reasoning framework is chosen, the goal is
    to determine which parameters have already been fixed and which parameters are still
    free. The free parameters become the focus of the architectural design activity. We first

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          35
     choose values for the free parameters and test them using the reasoning framework to see
     if quality attribute requirements are analytically satisfied. Then, we select architectural
     design fragments that are consistent with the chosen values.
•    tactics: a list of tactics for various attributes. While we still have to work out the template
     for describing tactics, we expect each tactic to contain the following information:
     −    references to one or more reasoning frameworks

     −    the relationship between one or more model parameters and an attribute measure, and
          how the tactic acts to control those parameters

     −    examples relating tactics to architectural design fragments
•    decision procedures: a sequence of rules4 that helps you choose a set of applicable tac-
     tics. We provide samplings of rules in this report. We expect these rules to include at least
     −    identification/filtering questions: sets of questions that help to determine suitable tac-
          tics

     −    optimization questions: known rules of thumb (expert knowledge) that can be used to
          shortcut the identification of tactics

     −    “unfixing the fixed” questions: a set of questions to be used for reacting to seemingly
          untenable design situations to identify requirements that can be weakened


6.2 Steps for Coupling Concrete Scenarios to Design
    Fragments
We now briefly discuss the steps exemplified in our two scenarios.

1.    Pick a concrete scenario. We are concerned, in general, with satisfying a set of require-
      ments expressed in terms of concrete scenarios. We assume that this set of steps is a por-
      tion of a design method. This method will determine the concrete scenario that is to be
      treated next. In general, the scenario is being treated in the context of a number of design
      decisions that have already been made.
2.    Type-check concrete scenarios. Each concrete scenario is an instance of a general sce-
      nario. Using the general-scenario-generation tables, we can verify that the concrete sce-
      nario is well formed by ensuring that it has all the elements of a general scenario. We
      also start identifying responsibilities from elements of the concrete scenario.
3.    Identify candidate reasoning frameworks. One of the assets that we assume is available
      is an association between general scenarios and reasoning frameworks. We itemize pos-
      sible reasoning frameworks. Some of the information from the concrete scenarios might

4
     The rules in this report are more like guidelines and heuristics; they certainly are not formal. However, we
     are hopeful that they provide a starting point for rules that will ultimately be codified for use in an expert sys-
     tem that serves as an architectural design assistant.

36                                                                                          CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
     eliminate possible reasoning frameworks. For example, if we know that the response
     measure is a hard deadline, a queuing modeling framework is eliminated from consid-
     eration. Each reasoning framework has a collection of parameters that must be set before
     the reasoning framework can be applied.
4.   Determine the bound and free parameters. The candidate reasoning framework has a
     number of parameters. Some of them might be given by the concrete scenarios, while
     others might be given by elements of the existing design that are unchangeable. For ex-
     ample, a concrete scenario may specify that “events arrive periodically.” This specifica-
     tion may require a specific scheduling model. Another element of the existing design
     might be that a particular OS is to be used, which determines the execution time associ-
     ated with processing one event. That execution time is a parameter of the model that is
     bound. All parameters not bound are considered to be free. The set of bound parameters
     reflects decisions that have already been made; the set of free parameters are decisions
     yet to be made.

     Dependent parameters are a special case. They are constrained by the response measure,
     not bound. Furthermore, all the tactics within a particular reasoning framework, by defi-
     nition, affect the dependent parameters. Thus, dependent parameters are not considered
     in this determination.
5.   Determine the tactics associated with the free parameters. One of the assets we assume
     is an enumeration of tactics and the parameters they control. This enumeration enables
     the tactics associated with the free parameters we use to be listed as candidate tactics for
     Steps 6-8.
6.   Assign the free parameters an initial set of values. The designer makes an estimate for
     each free parameter based on intuition or knowledge. If the designer has no intuition or
     knowledge for a particular parameter, an arbitrary value can be chosen. If this parameter
     is important to the system, an implementation of a prototype might be appropriate to get
     an estimate.

     One question that comes up is “what if the initial set of values is radically incorrect?”
     We have three responses to this question:
     a.   This is not a problem associated with our treatment of quality attributes. Any design
          method will require some knowledge of the parameters of importance. Otherwise,
          how can a design accommodate those quality attribute requirements?
     b.   The values chosen, regardless of whether they are initial or final values, provide
          budgets or constraints for the remainder of the design. Decisions made during qual-
          ity attribute analysis must be realized through the entire development process—
          architectural design, detailed design, and implementation.
     c.   A sensitivity analysis can be done to show how sensitive the response measure is to
          uncertainties in the independent parameters. If there is no sensitivity, inaccuracies



CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                              37
          will not matter as much; if there is great sensitivity, the steps should lead to a better
          binding, in any case.
7.   Select tactics and apply them to bind values to achieve the required response measure.
     In general, there will be multiple free parameters. We must determine bindings so that
     the response measure is satisfied. This is equivalent to determining satisfactory values
     for x and y in one linear equation in two unknowns. The values chosen for the two un-
     knowns must be compatible with the equation and thus must be determined simultane-
     ously, or at least the second value must be determined in the context of the first.

     We begin our description by considering the situation in which there is only one free pa-
     rameter and one scenario. That is, we are considering a single concrete scenario in which
     there is only one free parameter and only one modeling framework.

     Each candidate tactic for that free parameter controls the parameter’s value. For each
     candidate tactic, determine whether it can adjust the value of the free parameter to a new
     value where the resulting model’s solution satisfies the response measure of the concrete
     parameter. If it can, the tactic becomes relevant. If it cannot, the tactic is discarded.

     Now consider multiple free parameters. In this situation, we need to consider simultane-
     ously adjusting all free parameters. That is, if tactic 1 controls parameter 1, and tactic 2
     controls parameter 2, we need to determine whether we can move the value for parame-
     ter 1 through tactic 1 and the value for parameter 2 through tactic 2, until the dependent
     parameter satisfies the response measure given by the concrete scenario. If we can, we
     have developed satisfactory bindings. If we have more than one tactic for each parame-
     ter, we need to consider all possible combinations of tactics for the parameters.
8.   Allocate responsibilities to the architectural elements of the design fragments that are
     associated with the selected tactics. Every tactic applied during Step 7 has a design frag-
     ment associated with it and a set of rules that help to
      •   Create/delete/refine architectural elements.
      •   Add responsibilities to architectural elements.
      •   Reallocate responsibilities of already-defined architectural elements.
      •   Refine responsibilities and allocate them to architectural elements.
     For example, using the Semantic-importance-based scheduling tactic involves applying
     the following rules:
      •   Create an architectural element “scheduler” with its associated responsibilities.
      •   Allocate the responsibilities of higher importance to units of concurrency with a
          higher priority.




38                                                                          CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
   Using the Break the dependency chain tactic involves applying the following rules:
     •   Create an architectural element “intermediary.”
     •   Add responsibilities to the intermediary that translate from the more abstract inter-
         face provided to the secondary modules to the concrete interface provided by the
         primary module.
     •   Refine the responsibilities of the secondary modules to use the services of the in-
         termediary.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                         39
40   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
7 Summary and Remaining Open Issues



Our goal in this report was to present evidence that it is possible to move from a concrete
scenario to a design fragment, while maintaining analytic capability. In the process, we
wanted to identify open issues.


We demonstrated moving from a concrete scenario to a general scenario and discussed how
to find tactics to achieve the desired response. This portion of our argument is the most thor-
oughly thought out. We then hypothesized associating a collection of design fragments with
each tactic that both realizes the tactic and adheres to the model parameters that we have used
to do the analysis. This association is clearly possible, although the list of design fragments
may be rather long; selecting among them is an open issue.


Another open issue is the composition of design fragments in a methodical way, which is a
topic of a future report. Composing two design fragments most likely changes parameters of
the quality attribute models. For example, adding additional responsibilities to the intermedi-
ary to support modifiability may increase the execution time, which is a parameter in the per-
formance model. Two important open issues in the composition area are (1) understanding
the influences of design fragments on other quality attribute models and (2) modifying a
composed design in such a way that the response measures continue to be satisfied.


We assume that the steps presented here are embedded in a design method. What are the
characteristics of that method? In particular, in which order does it choose among the con-
crete scenarios? Does it treat one scenario at a time or multiple scenarios at a time? What
does it do when the quality requirements (the concrete scenarios) over-constrain a solution?


Clearly this work is related to previous work on the Attribute-Driven Design method (ADD)
[Bass 02]. ADD is a method for designing architectures that is based on isolating the “driv-
ing” quality requirements, identifying design decisions to satisfy them, and using those deci-
sions as a constraint for further design decisions. Currently ADD provides no guidance on
how to make design decisions satisfy the driving requirements. The steps discussed in this
report and their envisioned extensions provide a basis for making such design decisions.


Finally, our steps depend heavily on the existence and general accuracy of quality attribute
models. Such models exist for performance and are as accurate as the fidelity of their pa-
rameters to the values associated with an actual system. They exist much more weakly, if at


CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           41
all, for other quality attributes. Does this mean that our goal of providing analytic guidance to
a designer is doomed to fail? We think not. First of all, if our design method is capable of
providing analytic guidance for only performance, the architect is still advanced from the cur-
rent state. Secondly, large communities are actively working on developing and refining qual-
ity attribute models, and some of these efforts should be successful in time. Lastly, we have
seen decision procedures (at least in an initial form) that have the effect of causing an archi-
tect to focus on and think about a variety of factors that affect the quality attribute achieve-
ment of architectural design. Those decision procedures, by themselves, provide the architect
with a checklist that will help to improve any design process.




42                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Appendix A General Scenarios



Quality requirements of a system shape the software architecture of that system. To be useful,
quality requirements should be specified precisely. General scenarios provide a vehicle for
this. A quality attribute scenario consists of the following parts:

•   a stimulus: a condition that needs to be considered when it arrives at a system
•   a response: the activity undertaken after the arrival of the stimulus
•   a source of the stimulus: the entity (e.g., a human or a computer system) that generated
    the stimulus
•   an environment: the conditions under which the stimulus occurs; for example, when the
    system is in an overload condition
•   a stimulated artifact: Some artifact is stimulated. It could be the whole system or pieces
    of it.
•   a response measure: the attribute-specific constraint that must be satisfied by the re-
    sponse

The values (vocabulary) normally used to specify the six parts of a scenario depend on the
quality that has to be achieved. We put the vocabulary used for the availability, performance,
modifiability, usability, security, and testability qualities together into tables that can be used
to generate general scenarios. The general-scenario-generation tables for modifiability and
performance are shown in Table 14 and Table 15, respectively.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                              43
Table 14: Modifiability General-Scenario-Generation Table

Part of Scenario   Possible Values
source             • end user
                   • developer
                   • system administrator
stimulus           wants to add/delete/modify/change
                   • functionality
                   • quality attribute
                   • capacity
environment        • runtime
                   • compile time
                   • build time
                   • design time
artifact           • system
                   • user interface
                   • platform
                   • environment
                   • system that interoperates with target system
response           • locates places in the architecture to be modified
                   • makes a modification without affecting other functionality
                   • tests a modification
                   • deploys a modification
response measure   • cost/effort in terms of
                     − the number of components affected
                     − effort
                     − money
                   • extent to which this affects other functions or quality at-
                     tributes




44                                                                    CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Table 15: Performance General-Scenario-Generation Table

Part of Scenario          Possible Values
source                    • one of a number of independent sources
                          • possibly from within the system
stimulus                  • periodic events arrive
                          • sporadic events arrive
                          • stochastic events arrive
environment               • normal conditions
                          • overload conditions
artifact                  • system
                          • process
response                  • processes stimuli
                          • changes level of service
response measure          • latency
                          • deadline
                          • throughput
                          • jitter
                          • miss rate
                          • data loss

General scenarios are quality attribute scenarios that are system independent—that is, they
can be applied to any system. A general scenario can be generated by choosing several val-
ues—one from each column of the general-scenario-generation table—and combining them
in a sentence or two. For example, a potential general scenario for performance is shown in
Table 16.


Table 16: Example General Scenario for Performance

               source                    one of a number of independent
                                         sources
               stimulus                  periodic events arrive
               environment               normal conditions
               artifact                  system
               response                  processes stimuli
               response measure          latency




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                       45
When written as two sentences, the scenario could be


       A periodic event from an independent source arrives at the system under
       normal conditions. The system has to process the stimulus within a certain
       latency.


Ultimately, a general scenario must be made system specific—called a concrete scenario.
This conversion involves replacing the more generic vocabulary with concrete system-
specific vocabulary. For example, the performance scenario shown above can be made sys-
tem specific as follows:


       An event from sensor X arrives every 10 ms at a system that operates under
       normal conditions. The system has to process the stimulus within 1 ms.




46                                                                    CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
Appendix B Tactics



We now briefly recapitulate our discussion of tactics from Illuminating the Fundamental
Contributors to Software Architecture Quality [Bachmann 02]. A tactic is a means of satisfy-
ing a quality-attribute-response measure by manipulating some aspect of a quality attribute
model through architectural design decisions.5


This definition of tactic has the following consequences:

•   An architectural tactic is concerned with the relationship between design decisions and a
    quality attribute response. This response is usually something that would be specified as a
    requirement (e.g., an average latency requirement). Therefore, architectural tactics (by
    definition) are points of leverage for achieving quality attribute requirements. Conse-
    quently, codifying architectural tactics will involve articulating rules for making design
    decisions that control how and why the response varies.
•   Analytic models for the various quality attributes allow us to identify design decisions
    that offer leverage for achieving quality attribute requirements. The analytic models also
    offer a reasoning framework for explaining how changes in the design decisions affect
    the response. Architectural tactics “live” within this reasoning framework.
•   While architectural tactics are motivated from an analytic perspective, they have specific
    realizations in an architectural design. For example, while a queuing model might only
    require the average execution time as input to the model, there are many sources of exe-
    cution time that need to be derived from an architectural design. Or, while a queuing
    model might be concerned only with how average latency varies as a function of the
    number of servers, in the architectural model, servers might be Web servers in one case
    and processors of a multiprocessor in another. There is a many-to-one relationship be-
    tween the analytic model and the corresponding architectural realizations. Consequently,
    codifying architectural tactics involves articulating some of the possible mappings from
    an architectural model to an analytic, quality attribute model.


Performance Tactics
In general, latency is affected by the level and nature of the demand for resources. This in-
cludes event-arrival rates, the execution time resulting from event arrivals, and the variability
level of each. Latency is also affected by the rules for choosing between conflicting demands
for a resource. The inability to use a resource, either because it is being used to process other

5
    Note that this definition is different than in our previous writings [Bachmann 02, Bass 03].

CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                                47
events or is physically (e.g., due to failure) or logically (e.g., due to inadequate resource-
allocation policies) unavailable, also affects latency. Therefore, we divide performance tactics
into three high-level groups:

1.   tactics for managing resource demand: These tactics control execution times and transfer
     times by controlling the demand for resources.
2.   tactics for arbitrating between conflicting demands: These tactics control preemption
     and waiting times when competing requests take semantic importance or urgency (dead-
     lines) into consideration and there is contention for shared resources.
3.   tactics for managing multiple resources: These tactics enable multiple resources to be
     used efficiently to ensure that available resources are used when they are needed,
     thereby controlling the waiting time for them.

Tactics for Managing Demand
Event streams are the source of resource demand. Two stream traits characterize demand: the
time between events in an event stream (i.e., the arrival rate) and how much of a resource is
consumed by each request (a.k.a., execution or service time). The variances in arrival rates
and execution times also affect latency.


The tactics for managing demand include

•    Manage the event rate. Tactics in this category control how often events are generated.
•    Control the frequency of sampling external events. If there is no direct control over the
     rate of externally generated events, queued events can be sampled at a lower frequency.
•    Reduce the computational overhead. Computational work usually requires OS and mid-
     dleware services to manage process interaction, communications, and the like.
•    Bound execution times. This means placing a limit on how much execution time is used
     to respond to an event.
•    Bound queue sizes. This tactic directly controls the maximum number of queued arrivals
     and effectively bounds arrival rates, but the consequence can be event loss.
•    Increase the computational efficiency of algorithms. Improving the algorithms used in
     critical areas reduces the demand for processor time and therefore has the effect of im-
     proving latency.
•    Control the demand for resources. When an algorithm requires the use of other re-
     sources, such as disks, its efficiency also depends on how those resources are used.

Tactics for Arbitrating Demand
When multiple streams make demands on the same (logical or physical) resource, tactics are
needed for managing the shared resource. One of the main considerations for arbitration is
the criterion used for selecting which competing streams should use the resource. Time-

48                                                                        CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
based, semantics-based, and fairness-based criteria are all considered. The fact that some-
times the resource is non-preemptable must also be considered. If such decisions are to be
made at runtime, support for multiprocessing is helpful.


The tactics for arbitrating demand include

•   Increase the logical concurrency. Mechanisms for achieving logical concurrency (such as
    processes and threads) allow the separation of concerns associated with processing event
    streams from the interleaving of such processing on a physical resource.
•   Determine the appropriate scheduling policy. Many tactics are focused on the policies
    used to assign processor time to processes. The appropriate scheduling policy strongly
    depends on the system’s goals. Scheduling tactics include
    −   offline scheduling. A schedule can be constructed offline using assumptions about the
        time to be taken by each stream.

    −   time-based scheduling. Informally, a “good” prioritization strategy takes into account
        the timing requirements associated with the stream (or even different arrivals within
        the same stream). This is reflected in three prioritization strategies:
        a.   rate monotonic (RM) strategy—a static priority assignment for periodic streams
             that accords higher priorities to streams with shorter periods than to those with
             longer ones
        b.   deadline monotonic (DM) strategy—a static priority assignment usually for pe-
             riodic streams that accords higher priorities to streams with tighter deadlines
             than to those with more distant ones
        c.   earliest deadline first (EDF) strategy—a dynamic priority assignment, usually
             for periodic streams, that accords higher priorities to process stimuli with tighter
             deadlines than to those with more distant ones
    −   semantic-importance-based scheduling. The importance of different functions can
        vary by system mode. Therefore, the system must focus its resources on the appro-
        priate work at the appropriate times.

    −   aperiodic servers. Another tactic for increasing the overall utility of a system focuses
        on computational work that is normally relegated to background processing.

    −   fairness-based scheduling. Several scheduling strategies that do not account for dead-
        lines are first-in, first-out (FIFO) scheduling and processor sharing.
•   Use synchronization protocols. When more than one thread of concurrency needs to ac-
    cess a shared resource (such as a queue or a data repository in a mutually exclusive man-
    ner) mechanisms such as locks and semaphores are commonly used. Various protocols
    include FIFO, priority inheritance, and priority ceiling protocols.



CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                           49
Tactics for Managing Multiple Resources
Exploiting the power of multiple resources to achieve performance goals introduces addi-
tional challenges to those managing single resources. However, physical concurrency brings
with it the need to make resource-allocation decisions, such as which processor(s) should be
used to process which event streams. When processing is physically distributed, the results
computed on one processor are often needed by other processors, introducing the need for
communication and synchronization. Making local copies can help reduce the overhead asso-
ciated with moving data around.


The tactics for managing multiple resources include

•    Increase the physical concurrency. A tactic for reducing latency is to increase the number
     of available resources. Additional processors, additional memory, and faster networks all
     have the potential for reducing latency by introducing the possibility of parallelism.
•    Balance resource allocation. Appropriately allocating the load between multiple re-
     sources is important if physical concurrency is to be exploited maximally.
•    Maintain multiple copies of either data or computation. Caching replicates data on dif-
     ferent speed repositories or on separate repositories to reduce contention. The clients in a
     client-server pattern are replicated computations, also to reduce contention.


Modifiability Tactics
The tactics for affecting modifiability are organized into three sets: (1) those that localize ex-
pected modifications, (2) those that restrict the visibility of responsibilities, and (3) those that
prevent the ripple effect. Each set is described below.


Tactics for Localizing Expected Modifications
The responsibilities that are assigned to modules greatly influence the cost of making a
change. Depending on how the assignment was done, a specific change can affect either a
single module or multiple ones. The goal of this set of tactics is to directly affect as few mod-
ules as possible with a single change by presenting guidelines for how responsibilities are
assigned.


The tactics for localizing expected modifications include

•    Maintain semantic coherence. Semantic coherence refers to the relationships between a
     module’s responsibilities. Semantically coherent responsibilities are related by what they
     do, carrying out the same or at least similar functions. The goal here—ensuring that a
     module’s responsibilities all work together without excessive reliance on other mod-



50                                                                           CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
    ules—is achieved by choosing responsibilities that have some sort of semantic coherence.
    Doing so binds responsibilities that are likely to be affected by a change.
•   Isolate the expected change. Separating the responsibilities that are likely to change from
    those that are unlikely to change separates an architecture into fixed and variant parts.
    This enables more design effort to be devoted to making a selected subset of modules as
    easy to change as possible.
•   Raise the abstraction level. Raising the abstraction level, and thus making a module more
    general, allows that module to calculate a broader range of functions based on input.
•   Limit options. Limiting the set of possible modifications will reduce the variations that
    need to be considered in the design and simplify constructing a system suitable for modi-
    fication. This tactic is in addition to those published in Illuminating the Fundamental
    Contributors to Software Architecture Quality [Bachmann 02].
•   Abstract common services in the primary modules. Localize services that are used com-
    monly by a variety of consumers. This tactic is in addition to those published in Illumi-
    nating the Fundamental Contributors to Software Architecture Quality [Bachmann 02].

Tactics for Restricting the Visibility of Responsibilities
If a module is affected by a change, it is important to know whether that change will become
visible outside the module. If it will, changes to other modules will most likely be required.


The tactics for restricting visibility include

•   Hide information. This tactic is based on dividing a module’s responsibilities into two
    categories: public and private. Public responsibilities are those that are visible from both
    inside and outside the module. Private responsibilities are those that are visible only from
    inside the modules. The goal of this tactic is to limit the public responsibilities and make
    them visible through an interface.
•   Maintain existing interfaces. This tactic is based on keeping interfaces constant across a
    particular change. That is, the module developer will maintain the old identity, syntax,
    and semantics of an existing interface even if the modification changes them.
•   Separate the interface from the implementation. This tactic allows the realization of the
    implementation later in the development process than the interface specification.

Tactics for Preventing the Ripple Effect
A ripple effect from a modification is the necessity for making changes to modules that are
not directly affected by that modification. This necessity occurs because of a dependency be-
tween the module that is directly affected and another module that is dependent on it.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                          51
The tactics for preventing the ripple effect include

•    Break the dependency chain. This tactic refers to the use of an intermediary to keep one
     module from being dependent on another and therefore to break the dependency chain.
     Typically, the name of the intermediary depends on the type of dependency it breaks. The
     following examples of intermediaries can also be seen as tactics:
     −   Use a name server. A name server breaks a dependency on the runtime location of a
         module.

     −   Use a virtual machine. Virtual machines break dependencies on computations spe-
         cific to a particular situation. Examples of virtual machines include the hardware ab-
         straction layer and the Factory pattern [Gamma 95].

     −   Use a publish-subscribe pattern. A publish-subscribe pattern breaks the dependency
         of a data consumer on the identity of the data producer.

     −   Use a repository. A repository can be used to break two types of dependencies:

         1.   the dependence of a data consumer on the identity of the publisher (as in the
              Publish-Subscribe pattern)
         2.   the dependency of the data consumer on the data’s syntax. Modern repositories
              allow the consumer to specify the type in which data is presented to them, re-
              gardless of the data’s type in the repository.
     −   Use a dynamic-scheduling algorithm. Some scheduling algorithms, such as semantic-
         importance-based scheduling, guarantee that deadlines will be achieved within cer-
         tain restrictions.
•    Make the data self-identifying. Tagging the data with identification information, such as
     sequence number (as in network protocols), syntax descriptions (as in some languages
     with dynamic runtime typing), or identity (as in free-form parameter invocation), will
     break dependencies on either sequencing or syntax.
•    Limit communication paths. Restricting the modules with which a given module will
     communicate has the effect of ensuring that no dependency exists between the two mod-
     ules. This tactic is in addition to those published in Illuminating the Fundamental Con-
     tributors to Software Architecture Quality [Bachmann 02].




52                                                                       CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
References/Bibliography



[Bachmann 02]         Bachmann, F.; Bass, L.; & Klein, M. Illuminating the Fundamental
                      Contributors to Software Architecture Quality (CMU/SEI-2002-TR-
                      025, ADA407778). Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute,
                      Carnegie Mellon University, 2002. <http://www.sei.cmu.edu
                      /publications/documents/02.reports/02tr025.html>.


[Bachmann 00]         Bachmann, F.; Bass, L.; & Klein, M. Quality Attribute Design
                      Primitives (CMU/SEI-2000-TN-017, ADA392284). Pittsburgh, PA:
                      Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2000.
                      <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/00.reports
                      /00tn017.html>.


[Bass 03]             Bass, L.; Clements, P.; & Kazman, R. Software Architecture in
                      Practice, 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2003.


[Bass 02]             Bass, L.; Bachmann, F.; & Klein, M. “Quality Attribute Design
                      Primitives and the Attribute-Driven Design Method,” 169-186. Pro-
                      ceedings of the 4th International Conference on Software Product
                      Family Engineering. Bilbao, Spain, October 3-5, 2001. Berlin,
                      Germany: Spring-Verlag, 2002.


[Bass 01]             Bass, L.; Klein, M.; & Moreno, G. Applicability of General Scenar-
                      ios to the Architecture Tradeoff Analysis Method (CMU/SEI-2001-
                      TR-014, ADA396098). Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Insti-
                      tute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2001. <http://www.sei.cmu.edu
                      /publications/documents/01.reports/01tr014.html>.


[Gamma 95]            Gamma, E.; Helm, R.; Johnson, R.; & Vlissides, J. Design Patterns:
                      Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Reading, MA: Ad-
                      dison-Wesley, 1995.




CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004                                                                   53
54   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
                                                                                                                   Form Approved
 REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE                                                                                         OMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching
existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding
this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters
Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of
Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1.   AGENCY USE ONLY                             2.   REPORT DATE                                           3.    REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED

     (Leave Blank)                                    March 2003                                                  Final
4.   TITLE AND SUBTITLE                                                                                     5.    FUNDING NUMBERS

     Deriving Architectural Tactics: A Step Toward Methodical                                                     F19628-00-C-0003
     Architectural Design
6.   AUTHOR(S)

     Felix Bachmann, Len Bass, Mark Klein
7.   PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                        8.    PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
                                                                                                                  REPORT NUMBER
     Software Engineering Institute
     Carnegie Mellon University                                                                                   CMU/SEI-2003-TR-004
     Pittsburgh, PA 15213
9.   SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                   10. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY
                                                                                                                  REPORT NUMBER
     HQ ESC/XPK
     5 Eglin Street                                                                                               ESC-TR-2003-004
     Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2116
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES


12A DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT                                                                     12B DISTRIBUTION CODE
     Unclassified/Unlimited, DTIC, NTIS
13. ABSTRACT (MAXIMUM 200 WORDS)
     This is one of several reports that provide the current status on the work being done by the Software Engi-
     neering Institute (SEISM) to understand the relationship between quality requirements and architectural design.
     The ultimate objective of this work is to provide analysis-based guidance to designers so that the quality at-
     tributes of generated designs are more predictable and better understood.
     Currently, four distinct problems must be solved to achieve that objective: (1) the precise specification of qual-
     ity attribute requirements, (2) the enumeration of architectural decisions that can be used to achieve desired
     quality attribute requirements, (3) a means of coupling one quality attribute requirement to the relevant archi-
     tectural decisions, and (4) a means of composing the relevant architectural decisions into a design. Embody-
     ing the solutions to these four problems into a design method that is sensitive to business priorities is an addi-
     tional problem. This report deals with the third problem—coupling one quality attribute requirement to
     architectural decisions that achieve it.
     This report provides initial evidence that there is, in fact, a systematic relationship between general scenarios,
     concrete scenarios, architectural tactics, and design fragments. It examines, in detail, two concrete scenar-
     ios—one for performance and one for modifiability—and describes how to move from each scenario, through
     tactics, to design fragments that satisfy the scenario.
14. SUBJECT TERMS                                                                                           15. NUMBER OF PAGES
     software architecture, software architecture design, software                                                68
     architectural tactics, quality attribute scenarios
16. PRICE CODE


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION           18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF                19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF           20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
     OF REPORT                              THIS PAGE                                    ABSTRACT
                                                                                                                                   UL
     Unclassified                           Unclassified                                 Unclassified
NSN 7540-01-280-5500                                                                Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18 298-102
