Realizing and Refining Architectural
Tactics: Availability
James Scott, Boeing Corporation
Rick Kazman, Software Engineering Institute




August 2009


TECHNICAL REPORT
CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
ESC-TR-2009-006


Research, Technology, and System Solutions
Unlimited distribution subject to the copyright.




http://www.sei.cmu.edu
This report was prepared for the

SEI Administrative Agent
ESC/XPK
5 Eglin Street
Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2100

The ideas and findings in this report should not be construed as an official DoD position. It is published in the
interest of scientific and technical information exchange.

This work is sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense. The Software Engineering Institute is a federally
funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense.

Copyright 2009 Carnegie Mellon University.

NO WARRANTY

THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS
FURNISHED ON AN “AS-IS” BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF
ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS
OBTAINED FROM USE OF THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE
ANY WARRANTY OF ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR
COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT.

Use of any trademarks in this report is not intended in any way to infringe on the rights of the trademark holder.

Internal use. Permission to reproduce this document and to prepare derivative works from this document for
internal use is granted, provided the copyright and “No Warranty” statements are included with all reproductions
and derivative works.

External use. This document may be reproduced in its entirety, without modification, and freely distributed in
written or electronic form without requesting formal permission. Permission is required for any other external
and/or commercial use. Requests for permission should be directed to the Software Engineering Institute at
permission@sei.cmu.edu.

This work was created in the performance of Federal Government Contract Number FA8721-05-C-0003 with
Carnegie Mellon University for the operation of the Software Engineering Institute, a federally funded research
and development center. The Government of the United States has a royalty-free government-purpose license to
use, duplicate, or disclose the work, in whole or in part and in any manner, and to have or permit others to do so,
for government purposes pursuant to the copyright license under the clause at 252.227-7013.
Table of Contents


Abstract                                          ix

1     Introduction                                1
      1.1 Using Tactics in Practice               2

2     Tactics for Availability                     5
      2.1 Updating the Tactics Catalog             6
      2.2 Fault Detection Tactics                  6
      2.3 Fault Recovery Tactics                  10
      2.4 Fault Prevention Tactics                16

3     An Example                                  19
      3.1 The Availability Model                  19
      3.2 The Resulting Redundancy Tactic         21
      3.3 Tactics Guide Architectural Decisions   22

4     Implications                                25

5     Conclusions                                 27

References                                        29




i | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
ii | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
List of Figures


Figure 1:    Original Availability Tactics                    6

Figure 2:    Refined Availability Tactics, with Examples      7

Figure 3:    System Redundancy Tactics Embedded in Patterns   12

Figure 4:    Transactions Tactic: Two-Phase Commit            17

Figure 5:    Markov Model of System Availability              20

Figure 6:    Passive Redundancy Tactics                       21




iii | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
iv | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
List of Tables


Table 1:     System Availability Requirements         5

Table 2:     Availability Tactics: Fault Detection    8

Table 3:     Availability Tactics: Fault Recovery     13

Table 4:     Availability Tactics: Fault Prevention   18




v | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
vi | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Acknowledgments


The authors wish to thank Len Bass, Robert Nord, and Joe Batman of the Carnegie Mellon®
Software Engineering Institute for their many enlightening discussions regarding the relationships
between tactics and quality attributes and for the categorization of quality attribute effects of tac-
tics on design decisions.




®
    Carnegie Mellon is registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office by Carnegie Mellon University.



vii | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
viii | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Abstract


Architectural tactics are fundamental design decisions. They are the building blocks for both arc-
hitectural design and analysis. A catalog of architectural tactics has now been in use for several
years in academia and industry. This report illustrates the use of this catalog in industrial applica-
tions, describing how tactics can be used in both design and analysis. The report further shows
how the needs of practice have caused the catalog of availability tactics to be updated, but demon-
strates that the underlying structure of the tactics categorization has remained stable. Finally, a
real-world example is provided of the application of the updated set of availability tactics, show-
ing how applying tactics illuminates design decisions, as guided by associated heuristics and ana-
lytic models.




ix | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
x | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
1 Introduction


The process of designing and analyzing software architectures is complex. Architectures are de-
termined by requirements (principally quality attribute requirements), which are in turn deter-
mined by an organization‟s business goals and constraints. But moving from the domain of re-
quirements to the domain of architecture has historically been an art more than a science.
Architectural design is a minimally constrained search through a vast multi-dimensional space of
possibilities. The end result is that architects are seldom confident that they have done the job op-
timally, or even satisfactorily.

Architectural patterns and styles have been proposed as a way to manage the unconstrained nature
of the architectural design process and to reduce the enormous size and complexity of the search
space [Garlan 1996, Buschmann 1996]. Such management has simplified the architectural design
process somewhat, but it is still a challenge: styles and patterns have replaced one form of black
magic—architectural design—with another form—choosing, tailoring, combining, and under-
standing patterns. Patterns are complex and their interactions with other patterns are not always
clear. Furthermore, patterns are always underspecified, and so the designer still needs to add in
considerable amounts of detail to reify these into an implementable design.

Patterns come with associated rationale, benefits, and liabilities (e.g., the Broker pattern is re-
ported to have low fault tolerance, “restricted” efficiency, and to be difficult to test and debug).
But such claims are contextual, depending on many environmental factors and detailed implemen-
tation decisions.

We have proposed a more fine-grained approach to architectural design, employing tactics [Bass
2003]. Tactics are the building blocks of architectures, and hence the building blocks of architec-
tural patterns. We have defined sets of tactics that address six quality attributes: performance,
usability, availability, modifiability, testability, and security. We have used these tactics over the
past five years, as a foundation for designing and analyzing architectures. So, for example, tactics
can ameliorate some of the deficiencies outlined above for the Broker pattern. The low fault toler-
ance of the “vanilla” Broker pattern could be ameliorated by using some form of active redundan-
cy, for instance.1

Before we discuss availability tactics in detail let us first look at an example of Modifiability tac-
tics to illustrate their impact [Bachmann 2007]. There are three classes of modifiability tactics:

1.    those that defer binding time decisions, to control deployment time and cost
2.    those that help to localize changes, reducing the number of modules directly affected by a
      change
3.    those that prevent ripple effects, limiting the modifications to localized modules




1
     As will be described in Section 2.3, in one form of the active redundancy configuration, a group of processing
     nodes comprises both active and redundant nodes that receive and process identical inputs in parallel, main-
     taining a synchronous state and enabling instantaneous recovery and repair.



1 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
To make an architecture more modifiable, the designer needs to select and realize one or more
tactics from this set.

Patterns package a number of tactics. Let us examine the most common architectural pattern—the
Layered Pattern—to see how this works in practice. Layers group together similar sets of functio-
nality and separate them from other functions that are expected to change independently.
Through this separation, the modifiability of the system is expected to increase. For example,
layering is often used to insulate a system from changes in the underlying platform (hardware and
software), increasing maintainability while reducing integration and verification costs. This has
been known at least as far back as Dijkstra‟s THE operating system [Dijkstra 1968]. To bring
about this insulation, the architect creates one or more platform-specific layers to abstract the de-
tails of the underlying hardware and operating system. The rest of the system‟s functionality then
accesses the underlying platform via these abstractions. To achieve this effect, the Layered Pattern
employs two Localize Change tactics—Semantic Coherence and Abstract Common Services—to
increase cohesion, and it employs three Prevent Ripple Effects tactics—Use Encapsulation,Use an
Intermediary, and Restrict Communication Paths—to reduce coupling [Bachmann 2007].

What is the point of this more granular representation of design operations? A tactic is a design
decision that is influential in the control of a single quality attribute response. As such it is simple
to understand and analyze—its properties and effects are well understood. A pattern, on the other
hand, is a prepackaged solution to a recurring problem that resolves multiple forces. Patterns are
more complex and so it is much harder to understand the implications of changing the pattern. To
understand a pattern, to tailor it, and to analyze it, you need to understand the tactics from which it
is composed and the effects of each constituent tactic.

Returning to the Layered Pattern, if the modifiability of the system with respect to a specific re-
sponsibility needs to be increased, one tactic that could be employed is Use an Intermediary.
Employing this tactic modifies the design: the independent functionality and the dependent func-
tionality are now separated by a third component—the intermediary. Along with the tactic there is
an analysis model (perhaps encapsulated in a “reasoning framework” [Bass 2005]) that allows the
designer and the analyst to reason about the cost of a change both with and without the interme-
diary, and so make a reasoned decision. The tactic requires effort, and hence cost, to implement
and maintain. In addition, after the implementation of this tactic, the strength of coupling between
the dependent and independent functionality is reduced.

Every design decision has side effects. Once the Use an Intermediary tactic is in place, it will
have an effect on runtime performance. Each of these attributes—cost, coupling, and perfor-
mance impact—can be estimated by the architect and a reasoned decision can be made on whether
to use the tactic.

In the remainder of this report, we will show how tactics are used in practice and how they inform
both design and analysis. In particular we will show how availability tactics have been used and
how they have been augmented over time to meet the needs of a changing world.

1.1 Using Tactics in Practice

Tactics can be used in both design and in analysis. They can be used in the design process to
make decisions or, more commonly, to modify an architectural pattern. In this way, tactics aid in



2 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
enumerating and choosing among design decisions. Similarly, tactics can be used in analysis.
Each tactic is easier to understand in isolation than a pattern and, as described by Bachmann,
analysis models can be associated with tactics [Bachmann 2007]. For example, there is a formula
for determining the increase in availability by adding a redundant hot spare. The architect, using
this formula, can then reason about the costs and benefits of using this form of redundancy. Simi-
larly the Ping/Echo tactic can be analyzed in terms of how long it takes to detect a fault (based on
the period of the Ping and the number of missed Pings before a fault is determined to have oc-
curred) and how the overhead of Ping messages degrades end-to-end latency in the system. To
show how this reasoning is supported, a specific set of tactics—availability tactics—is now dis-
cussed in detail.




3 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
4 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
2 Tactics for Availability


Availability tactics are designed to enable a system to endure system faults such that a service
be                                                                         [Bass 2003]. Inherent in
this definition is the distinction between a system fault and a system failure. System faults are
escalated to system failures once services are impacted to the point where they no longer comply
with their specifications. In operational systems, faults are detected and correlated prior to being
reported and repaired. Fault correlation logic will categorize a fault according to its severity (crit-
ical, major, or minor) and service impact (service affecting or non-service affecting) in order to
provide the system operator with timely and accurate system status and allow for the appropriate
repair strategy to be employed. The repair strategy may be automated or may require manual in-
tervention.

System availability builds upon the concept of system reliability by adding the notion of recovery,
                                                                                     [Jalote 1994]. In
practice, system requirements for availability are developed in accordance with steady-state avail-
ability (as opposed to instantaneous availability). Steady-state availability is the measurement of
a system‟s uptime over a sufficiently long (90 days, one year, total mission, etc.) duration. The
well-known expression used to derive steady-state availability is

                                          MTBF /(MTBF MTTR)
Where MTBF refers to the mean time between failures (derived based on the expected value of
the system‟s fault probability density function) and MTTR refers to the mean time to repair
(which varies according to the repair strategy employed).

Table 1:   System Availability Requirements

  Availability            Downtime/90 Days                    Downtime/Year

   99.0 %                 21 hr, 36 min               3 days, 15.6 hr

   99.9 %                  2 hr, 10 min                           8 hr, 0 min, 46 sec

   99.99 %                      12 min, 58 sec                          52 min, 34 sec

   99.999 %                       1 min, 18 sec                          5 min, 15 sec

   99.9999 %                               8 sec                                 32 sec


In practice, system designers develop a fault tree to characterize system faults according to their
severity and service impact, and identify a suitable repair strategy for each branch of the tree.
Table 1 provides an example of typical system availability requirements and associated threshold
values for acceptable system downtime, measured over observation periods of 90 days and one
year. The term high availability typically refers to designs targeting availability of 99.999% (“5
nines”) or greater. It should be noted that by definition, only unscheduled outages contribute to
system downtime.


5 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
2.1 Updating the Tactics Catalog

A categorization of availability tactics provided by Bass is reproduced in Figure 1, below [Bass
2003]. As illustrated, availability tactics are categorized according to whether they address fault
detection, recovery, or prevention.




Figure 1: Original Availability Tactics

We will review the availability tactics described by Bass [Bass 2003] and then show a new ver-
sion of this categorization that has been augmented and refined, based on several years of indus-
trial experience using the categorization for the analysis and design of high-availability systems.

Figure 2 illustrates the refined view of the tactics outlined in Figure 1. In addition to refining the
categorization, Figure 2 shows, below the tactics, some examples of specific implementation
techniques for each.

2.2 Fault Detection Tactics

The tactics that were classified as being for fault detection were Ping/Echo, Heartbeat, and Ex-
ception. In addition to these tactics, reported          [Bass 2003], we have classified Voting as a
tactic whose primary purpose is fault detection.

Ping/Echo refers to an asynchronous request/response message pair exchanged between nodes,
used to determine reachability and the round-trip delay through the associated network path.
Standard implementations of Ping/Echo are available for nodes interconnected via IP (ICMP




6 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
[IETF 1981] or ICMPv6 [RFC 2006b] Echo Request/Response
[IETF 2006a].

In addition we have generalized the notion of the Heartbeat tactic to System Monitor. In a high-
availability system, a System Monitor tactic is used to monitor state of health, which includes the
detection of hung or runaway processes; a heartbeat is one measure of health that a System Moni-
tor could observe. When the detection mechanism is implemented using a counter or timer that is
periodically reset, this specialization of System Monitor is referred to as a Watchdog. During no-
minal operation, the process being monitored will periodically reset the watchdog counter/timer,
commonly referred to as “petting the watchdog.”




Figure 2: Refined Availability Tactics, with Examples




7 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Table 2:     Availability Tactics: Fault Detection

Tactic                                         Mechanism                               Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report
Ping/Echo                       asynchronous request/response mes-        determines reachability and
                                sage pair exchanging active nodes         round-trip delay through the as-
                                                                          sociated network path


 ICMP/ICMPv6
 Echo Req/Reply


 MPLS Ping


System Monitor                                                            In high-availability system, moni-
                                                                          tors state of system health; de-
                                                                          tects hung or runaway processes


 Watchdog                       Hardware-based counter-timer periodi-     Upon expiration, indicates to sys-
                                cally reset by software                   tem monitor of a fault incurrence
                                                                          in the process


  Heartbeat                     Periodic message exchange between         Indicates to system monitor when
                                the system monitor and process            fault is incurred in process


Exception Detection                                                       Detects system conditions that
                                                                          alter the normal flow of execution


  System                        System raises an exception when it        Detects faults such as divide by
  Exceptions                    detects a fault                           zero, bus and address faults, il-
                                                                          legal program instructions


   Parameter                    Incorporates an a priori data pattern     Allows for runtime detection of
   Fence                        (such as 0xdeadbeef) placed imme-         overwriting the memory allocated
                                diately after any variable-length para-   for the object’s variable-length
                                meters of an object                       parameters


  Parameter Typing              Employs a base class that defines         Uses strong typing to build and
                                functions that add, find, and iterate     parse messages
                                over Type-Length-Value (TLV) format-
                                ted message parameters




8 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Tactic                                      Mechanism                                 Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report


Voting


    Triple Modular              Three identical processing units, each Detects any inconsistency among
    Redundancy                  receiving identical inputs, whose output the three output states, which is
                                is forwarded to voting logic             treated as a system fault




Expiration of the watchdog counter/timer provides an indication to the System Monitor that the
process being monitored has incurred a fault. When the underlying fault detection mechanism
employs a periodic message exchange between the System Monitor and the process being moni-
tored, this is referred to as a Heartbeat. For larger systems where scalability is a concern, trans-
port and processing overhead efficiency can be increased by piggybacking Heartbeat messages on
to other control messaging being exchanged between the process being monitored and the distri-
buted system controller. In this case, there is an added dependency between the Messaging Sys-
tem and the System Monitor. Based on the above discussion, we revise the Fault Detection tactic
category                       [Bass 2003] to include a System Monitor tactic that is further refined
to include a Watchdog and a Heartbeat tactic.

The Voting fault detection tactic is based on the fundamental contributions to automata theory by
Von Neumann, who demonstrated how systems having a prescribed reliability could be built from
unreliable co            [Von Neumann 1956]. The common realization of this tactic is referred to
as Triple Modular Redundancy (TMR), which employs three identical processing units, each of
which receives identical inputs, and forwards their output to voting logic, used to detect any in-
consistency among the three output states. Any such inconsistency is treated as a system fault.
TMR depends critically on the voting logic, which can be realized either as a singleton where the
probability of error is sufficiently low (the voting logic is a simple Boolean AND/OR combina-
tion) or as a redundant triple [Lyons 1962]. To demonstrate the improvement in system reliability
(specifically, MTBF) of a TMR-based design, consider a system where the probability of error of
a single bit is defined as εe. Applying TMR to that single bit will reduce the probability of error
from εe to

                                         TMR    3 e2 (1   e   )   3
                                                                  e


For example, if a single component has an error rate of .001, a TMR version of this component
will have an error rate of 0.000002998, or about three orders of magnitude better. TMR is com-
monly realized at the hardware gate and chip level, but can also be employed in software at the
thread or process level for scenarios where the outputs of the multiple threads or processes can be
synchronized by the voting logic.

The final Fault Detection tactic identified by Bass is the Exception tactic [Bass 2003]. The Ex-
ception tactic can be further refined into Exception Detection, Exception Handling, and Exception
Prevention tactics. Exception Detection refers to the detection of a system condition that alters



9 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
the normal flow of execution. For distributed real-time embedded systems, the Exception Detec-
tion tactic can be further refined to include System Exceptions, Parameter Fence, and Parameter
Typing tactics. System Exceptions will vary according to the processor hardware architecture em-
ployed and include faults such as divide by zero, bus and address faults, illegal program instruc-
tions, and so forth. The Parameter Fence tactic incorporates an a priori data pattern (such as
0xDEADBEEF) placed immediately after any variable-length parameters of an object. This al-
lows for runtime detection of overwriting the memory allocated for the object‟s variable-length
             [Utas 2005]. Parameter Typing employs a base class that defines functions that add,
find, and iterate over Type-Length-Value (TLV) formatted message parameters. Derived classes
use the base class functions to implement functions that provide Parameter Typing according to
each parameter‟s structure. Use of strong typing to build and parse messages will result in higher
                                                                               [Utas 2005].

2.3 Fault Recovery Tactics

Fault Recovery tactics are refined into Preparation and Repair tactics and Reintroduction tactics.
Preparation and Repair tactics include Active Redundancy, Passive Redundancy, Spare, Excep-
tion Handling, and Software Upgrade.2 Reintroduction tactics include Shadow, Rollback, Esca-
lating Restart, and Non-Stop Forwarding.

High-availability distributed real-time embedded systems commonly employ a strategy of equip-
ment protection, where spatially redundant line cards (circuit packs) are employed in a hot, warm,
or cold sparing configuration. These three configurations are referred to by Bass as active redun-
dancy (hot sparing), passive redundancy (warm sparing), and simply sparing                      [Bass
2003]. In our updated catalog of availability tactics, we refer to cold sparing as the Spare tactic.
Before describing each of these three configurations, we first define a protection group as being a
group of processing nodes where one or more nodes are “active” with the remaining nodes in the
protection group serving as redundant spares.

Active Redundancy refers to a configuration where all of the nodes (active or redundant spare) in a
protection group receive and process identical inputs in parallel, allowing the redundant spare(s)
to maintain synchronous state with the active node(s). Because the redundant spare possesses an
identical state to the active processor, recovery and repair can occur in time measured in millise-
conds. The simple case of one active node and one redundant spare node is commonly referred to
as 1+1 (“one plus one”) redundancy. Active Redundancy can also be used for Facilities Protec-
tion, where active and standby network links are used to ensure highly available network connec-
tivity. Standards-based realizations of Active Redundancy exist for protecting network links (i.e.,
facilities) at both the physical layer [Bellcore 1998, 1999, Telcordia 2000]
[IETF 2005].

Passive Redundancy refers to a configuration where only the active members of the protection
group process input traffic, with the redundant spare(s) receiving periodic state updates. Because
the state maintained by the redundant spares is only loosely coupled with that of the active
node(s) in the protection group (with the looseness of the coupling being a function of the check-
2
    Many tactics span multiple categories. For example, Voting can be considered a Fault Detection tactic, (detect-
    ing a dissenting vote), or a Fault Preparation and Repair tactic (correlating the fault). Voting also aids in Fault
    Prevention (by identifying a processor to be reset or repaired). However, in the taxonomy we have chosen to
    include it within the Fault Detection category.



10 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
pointing mechanism employed between active and redundant nodes), the redundant nodes are re-
ferred to as warm spares. Depending on a system‟s availability requirements, Passive Redundan-
cy provides a solution that achieves a balance between the more highly available but more
plex Active Redundancy tactic and the less available but significantly less complex Spare tactic.

Cold sparing, or simply sparing                        Bass, refers to a configuration where the
redundant spares of a protection group remain out of service until a fail-over occurs, at which
point a Power-On-Reset procedure is initiated on the redundant spare prior to its being placed in
service [Bass 2003]. Due to its poor recovery performance, cold sparing is better suited for sys-
tems having only high-reliability (MTBF) requirements as opposed to those also having high-
availability requirements.

In practice, the system architect will determine whether to use Active Redundancy, Passive Re-
dundancy, or Spare based on the system availability requirements allocated. Figure 3 illustrates
the data flow for each of these three tactics, embedded in the context of patterns.

Recall from Section 2.2 that the Exception tactic can be refined into Exception Detection, Excep-
tion Handling, and Exception Prevention tactics, with Exception Detection being discussed in that
section. The mechanism employed for Exception Handling depends largely on the programming
environment employed, ranging from simple function return codes (Error Codes) to the use of
Exception Classes that contain information helpful in fault correlation, such as the name of the
exception thrown, the o                                                                [Powell-
Douglas 1999].




11 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Figure 3: System Redundancy Tactics Embedded in Patterns

Software Upgrade is another Preparation and Repair tactic whose goal is to achieve in-service
upgrades to executable code images in a non-service-                     [Scott 2008]. This tactic is
refined by Function Patch, Class Patch, and Hitless In-Service Software Upgrade (ISSU) tactics.
The Function Patch tactic is used in a procedural programming environment and employs an in-
cremental linker/loader to store an updated software function into a pre-allocated segment of tar-
get memory. The new version of the software function will employ the entry and exit points of
the deprecated function. Also, upon loading the new software function, the symbol table must be
updated and the instruction cache invalidated. The Class Patch tactic is applicable for targets ex-
ecuting object-oriented code, where the class definitions include a backdoor mechanism that
enables the runtime addition of member data and functions. Hitless In-Service Software Upgrade
is a tactic that leverages the Active Redundancy or Passive Redundancy tactics to achieve non-
service-affecting upgrades to software and associated schema. In practice, the Function Patch
and Class Patch tactics are used to deliver bug fixes while the Hitless In-Service Software Up-
grade tactic is used to deliver new features and capabilities.



12 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Table 3:     Availability Tactics: Fault Recovery

Tactic                                      Mechanism                                Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report.
Preparation and
Repair


Active Redundancy               Configuration wherein all of the          Redundant spare possesses
                                nodes (active or redundant spare) in      an identical state to the ac-
                                a protection group receive and            tive processor, so recovery
                                process identical inputs in parallel      and repair can occur in milli-
                                                                          seconds


Passive Redundancy              Configuration wherein only the ac-        Achieves a balance between
                                tive members of the protection            the more highly available but
                                group process input traffic, with the     more complex Active Re-
                                redundant spare(s) receiving peri-        dundancy tactic and the less
                                odic state updates                        available but significantly
                                                                          less complex Spare tactic

Spare                           Configuration wherein the redun-          Initiates power-on-reset pro-
                                dant spares of a protection group         cedure on the redundant
                                remain out of service until a fail-over   spare prior to its being
                                occurs                                    placed in service

Exception Handling              Depends largely on the program-
                                ming environment employed, rang-
                                ing from simple function return
                                codes (Error Codes) to the use of
                                Exception Classes that contain in-
                                formation helpful in fault correlation


 Exception Classes              Contain information helpful in fault      Allows system to trans-
                                correlation, such as the name of the      parently recover from system
                                exception thrown, the origin of the       exceptions
                                exception, and the cause of the ex-
                                ception thrown

Software Upgrade                                                          Achieves in-service up-
                                                                          grades to executable code
                                                                          images in a non-service af-
                                                                          fecting



 Function Patch                 An incremental linker/loader in a         Stores an updated software
                                procedural programming                    function into a pre-allocated
                                environment                               segment of target memory




13 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Tactic                                     Mechanism                              Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report.


  Class Patch                   Applicable for targets executing ob-   Enables the runtime addition
                                ject-oriented code, where the class    of member data and
                                definitions include a backdoor         functions
                                mechanism


  Hitless In-Service            Leverages the Active Redundancy        Achieves non-service-
  Software Upgrade              or Passive Redundancy tactics          affecting upgrades to soft-
  (ISSU)                                                               ware and associated schema


Reintroduction                                                         Failed component is reintro-
                                                                       duced after correction


Shadow                          Operates a previously failed or in-    Reverts the component back
                                service upgraded component in a        to an active role
                                “shadow mode” for a pre-defined
                                duration of time


State                           When realized as a refinement to       Allows a system’s control
Resynchronization               the Active Redundancy tactic, oc-      element to dynamically re-
                                curs organically as active and         cover its control plane state
                                standby components each receive        from its network peers
                                and process identical inputs in
                                parallel
                                                                       Periodically compares state
                                When realized as a refinement to       of the active and standby
                                the Passive Redundancy tactic, is      components to ensure
                                based solely on periodic state in-     synchronization
                                formation transmitted from the ac-
                                tive component(s) to the standby
                                component and involves the Roll-
                                back tactic


 Graceful Restart               Includes inter-networking devices      Allows a system’s control
                                such as cross-connects, switches,      element to dynamically re-
                                and packet routers                     cover its control plane state
                                                                       from its network peers


Rollback                        Checkpoint based                       Allows the system state to be
                                                                       reverted to the most recent
                                                                       consistent set of checkpoints


  Coordinated                   Allows processes to resolve depen-     More complex mechanism
  Checkpointing                 dencies and restart at a coordinated   that is always consistent
                                checkpoint




14 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Tactic                                     Mechanism                              Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report.
   Uncoordinated                Allows processes to take check-        Simple mechanism but may
   Checkpointing                points when most convenient            not always result in a consis-
                                                                       tent state


 Escalating Restart             Varies the granularity of the compo-   At final level, completely
                                nent(s) restarted and minimizes the    reloads and reinitializes the
                                level of service affectation           executable image and asso-
                                                                       ciated data segment


 Non-Stop                       Includes inter-networking devices      Maintains proper functioning
 Forwarding                     such as cross-connects, switches,      of the user data plane (bear-
                                and packet routers                     er channel services)




Other Preparation and Repair tactics exist that are primarily realized by a hardware design and,
hence, beyond the scope of this work. Examples include Error Detection and Correction
(EDAC) coding, Forward Error Correction (FEC), and Temporal Redundancy. EDAC coding is
typically used to protect control memory structures in high-availability distributed real-time em-
bedded systems [Hamming 1980]. Conversely, FEC coding is typically employed to recovery
from physical layer errors occurring on external network links [Morelos-Zaragoza 2006]. Tem-
poral Redundancy involves sampling spatially redundant clock or data lines at time intervals that
exceed the pulse width of any transient pulse to be tolerated, and then voting out any defects de-
       [Mavis 2002].

Some Fault Recovery tactics rely on component reintroduction, where a failed component is rein-
troduced after it has been corrected. Reintroduction tactics include Shadow, State Resynchroniza-
tion/Graceful Restart, Rollback, Escalating Restart, and Non-Stop Forwarding.

The Shadow tactic refers to operating a previously failed or in-service upgraded component in a
“shadow mode” for a pre-defined duration of time prior to reverting the component back to an
active role. In this context, the Shadow tactic is a Reintroduction version of the Hitless In-Service
Software Upgrade tactic previously discussed as a Preparation and Repair tactic.

Similarly, State Resynchronization is a reintroduction refinement to the Active Redundancy and
Passive Redundancy preparation and repair tactics. When realized as a refinement to the Active
Redundancy tactic, the State Resynchronization occurs organically, as the active and standby
components each receive and process identical inputs in parallel. In practice, the states of the ac-
tive and standby components are periodically compared to ensure synchronization. This compari-
                                                              [Morelos-Zaragoza 2006] or, for sys-
tems providing safety-critical services, a message digest calculation (a     -
[Schneier 2001]. Conversely, when realized as a refinement to the Passive Redundancy (warm
sparing) tactic, State Resynchronization is based solely on periodic state information transmitted
from the active component(s) to the standby component(s). This operation involves an additional
reintroduction tactic referred to as Rollback. Rollback is a checkpoint-based recovery mechanism


15 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
that allows the system state to be reverted to the most recent consistent set of checkpoints. The
set of checkpoints is referred to as a “recovery line,” which may be generated using graph-
theoretic techniques described by Elnozahy [Elnozahy 2002]. Checkpoint-based rollback recov-
ery may employ Uncoordinated Checkpointing, where processes are allowed to take checkpoints
when most convenient, or Coordinated Checkpointing, where processes resolve dependencies and
                                     [Scott 2008]. A specialization of State Resynchronization,
used in tandem with the Non-Stop Forwarding tactic is Graceful Restart, which allows a system‟s
control element to dynamically recover its control plane state from its network peers. Standard
realizations of Graceful Restart have emerged for a variety of commonly deployed routing and
                                   [IETF 2007 2007c]            [IETF 2007a [IETF 2008], LDP
[IETF 2003b]              - [IETF 2003a, 2003c].

Escalating Restart is a Reintroduction tactic that allows the system to recover from faults by vary-
ing the granularity of the component(s) restarted and minimizing the level of service affectation
[Utas 2005]. For example, consider a system that supports four levels of restart, as follows. The
lowest level of restart (call it Level 0), and hence least impacting on services, employs Passive
Redundancy (warm restart), where all child threads of the component in which the fault was de-
tected are killed and recreated. In this way, only data associated with the child threads is freed
and reinitialized. The next level of restart (Level 1) frees and reinitializes all unprotected memory
(protected memory would remain untouched). The next level of restart (Level 2) frees and reini-
tializes all memory, both protected and unprotected, forcing all applications to reload and reini-
tialize. And the final level of restart (Level 3) would involve completely reloading and reinitializ-
ing the executable image and associated data segments. Support for the Escalating Restart tactic
is particularly useful for the concept of graceful degradation, where a system is able to degrade
the services it provides while maintaining support for mission-critical or safety-critical applica-
tions.

Another Reintroduction tactic used to enable graceful degradation of high-availability systems is
Non-Stop Forwarding (NSF). This concept is borrowed from commercial best current practice in
designing inter-networking devices, such as cross-connects, switches, and packet routers. Non-
Stop Forwarding refers to the ability of the device to maintain proper functioning of the user data
plane (bearer channel services), even when the device‟s control and/or management planes are out
of service. Support for Non-Stop Forwarding implies a strict separation of control/management
and data plane functionality in the system design, as described through the Internet Engineering
              [IETF 2004]. In heritage digital cross-connect (DXC) and ATM switch design, this
tactic is referred to as the “Headless Mode” of operation. The term Non-Stop Forwarding has
emerged as the standard nomenclature used when the Headless Mode tactic is applied to packet
router designs targeting high-availability services.

2.4 Fault Prevention Tactics

Fault Prevention tactics include Removal from Service, Transactions, Process Monitor, and Ex-
ception Prevention. In the context of fault prevention, the Removal from Service tactic refers to
placing a system component in an out-of-service state for the purpose of mitigating potential sys-
tem failures. One example involves taking a component of a system out of service and resetting
the component in order to scrub latent faults (such as memory leaks, fragmentation, or soft errors




16 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
in an unprotected cache) before the accumulation of faults become service affecting (resulting in
system failure).

Systems targeting high-availability services leverage transactional semantics to ensure that asyn-
chronous messages exchanged between distributed components are atomic, consistent, isolated,
and durable [Gray 1993]. These four properties are referred to as the “ACID properties” and are
generally a requirement for high-availability systems, particularly those that provide either
mission-critical or safety-critical services. The Transactions tactic is typically realized using an
“atomic commit protocol,” the most common of which is the “two-phase commit” (a.k.a. 2PC)
protocol, originally described by Gray [Gray 1993]. Figure 4 illustrates the successful case of a
distributed two-phase commit transaction. For the case where a distributed two-phase commit
transaction fails, the transaction coordinator will employ the Rollback tactic among all distributed
components involved in the failed transaction, in order to ensure a consistent and durable system
state.




Figure 4: Transactions Tactic: Two-Phase Commit




17 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
In the context of fault prevention, the Process Monitor tactic is employed to monitor the state of
health (SOH) of a system process in order to ensure that the system is operating within its nominal
operating parameters. This tactic has a symbiotic relation to the System Monitor previously de-
scribed, and in practice, the Process Monitor may be a lower level function of a hierarchical sys-
tem monitoring function.

Recall from the previous discussion that the Exception tactic has been refined into Exception De-
tection, Exception Handling, and Exception Prevention tactics, with Exception Detection de-
scribed in Section 2.2 and the Exception Handling tactic described in Section 2.3. The Exception
Prevention tactic refers to techniques employed for the purpose of preventing system exceptions
from occurring. The use of Exception Classes, which allows a system to transparently recovery
from system exceptions, was discussed in Section 2.3 [Powell-Douglas 1999]. Other examples of
tactical refinements used to realize Exception Prevention include abstract data types such as Smart
Pointers and the use of Wrappers [Gamma 1995] to prevent faults such as dangling pointers and
semaphore access violations from occurring.


Table 4:     Availability Tactics: Fault Prevention

Tactic                                     Mechanism                                 Result
Control/click on tactic to go
to its description in report
Removal from                    Places a system component in an        Allows for mitigating potential sys-
Service                         out-of-service state                   tem failures before their accumu-
                                                                       lation affects service


Transactions                                                           Ensures a consistent and durable
                                                                       system state


 Atomic Commit                  Most commonly the two-phase
 Protocol                       commit


Process Monitor                                                        Monitors the state of health of a
                                                                       system process; ensures that the
                                                                       system is operating within its no-
                                                                       minal operating parameters


Exception                                                              Prevents system exceptions from
Prevention                                                             occurring


 Exception Classes              Contain information helpful in fault   Allows system to transparently
                                correlation, such as the name of       recover from system exceptions
                                the exception thrown, the origin of
                                the exception, and the cause of the
                                exception thrown


 Smart Pointers/                Abstract data types that control all   Prevent faults such as dangling
 Wrappers                       access through pointers                pointers and semaphore access
                                                                       violations


18 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
3 An Example


We will now present an example from the internetworking domain, where a network node is re-
sponsible for providing high-availability services, such as cross-connecting voice circuits, switch-
ing cells, frames, or packets, or routing and forwarding IP packets.

The system architect, knowing that high availability is crucial, has determined that some form of
redundancy will be employed. The architect‟s next step is to determine and apply the appropriate
redundancy tactics to ensure compliance with the system‟s precise availability requirements.
Architectural insight can and should be developed through model-based analysis wherever possi-
ble. Consider the case of an architecture being developed for a high-availability system having a
99.999% (a.k.a. “5 nines”) availability requirement. We will show how we employ a Markov
model to determine the appropriate redundancy tactic to employ in the system architecture.

3.1 The Availability Model

The availability model, from Gokhale, employed and illustrated in Figure 5, takes into account the
Mean Time Between Failure and Mean Time To Recover for both hardware and software compo-
nents of the system [Gokhale 2005]. In addition, failures are characterized according to high and
low severity levels. Each of the hardware and software components can be in one of three states:
In-Service, Degraded Service, or Out-of-Service. In-Service implies nominal operation with no
faults having been detected and with service levels consistent with the components‟ specifica-
tions. Degraded Service implies that a severity 2 (low priority) fault has been detected and corre-
lated and is in the process of being mitigated. Mitigation strategies for severity 2 faults may range
from resetting ASIC personalities or software processes to executing a managed fail-over to a re-
dundant processor. Out-of-Service implies that a severity 1 (high priority) fault has been detected
and correlated and is in the process of being mitigated. Mitigation of severity 1 faults typically
involves a managed fail-over to a redundant processor. The combination of three states for hard-
ware and software components results in a state space of nine states in the Markov model. The
simultaneous severity 1 failure state (i.e., severity 1 faults in both hardware and software) is not
considered to be a valid state, as the fault detection and correlation logic would assign the (root
cause) fault to either software or hardware, but not both.

The model assumes that MTBF values for all four types of failures are exponentially distributed.
MTBF values for severity 1 and 2 hardware and software failure states are denoted in the model
using the {λHW-SEV1, λHW-SEV2, λSW-SEV1, λSW-SEV2} nomenclature. Similarly, the model assumes
that MTTR values for recovering from the four types of failures are exponentially distributed.
MTTR values for recovering from severity 1 and 2 hardware and software failure states are de-
noted by the {μHW-SEV1, μHW-SEV1, μSW-SEV1, μSW-SEV1} nomenclature. The steady-state system
availability (A) is determined by adding the probabilities of the system operating in a nominal In-
Service state and the various combinations of In-Service and Degraded Service states.

   A    P( HWIS : SWIS ) P( HWIS : SWSEV 2 ) P( HWSEV 2 : SWIS ) P( HWSEV 2 : SWSEV 2 )




19 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
In order to solve the preceding equation, a system of balance equations is derived from the availa-
bility model. The derivation of the balance equations and resulting solution for this model are
found in Gokhale [Gokhale 2005].

Table 5 provides an analysis of system availability for three separate Redundancy tactics: Active
(hot sparing), Passive (warm sparing), and Spare (cold sparing). The analysis assumes that soft-
ware failures are five times more likely to occur than hardware failures and that severity 2 failures
are also five times more likely to occur than severity 1 failures. The analysis assumes that the
MTTR for severity 2 failures is 30 seconds for each scenario (active, passive, and spare) and that
the MTTR for severity 1 failures is one second for Active Redundancy, five seconds for Passive
Redundancy, and 15 minutes for the (cold sparing) Spare tactic. Wherever possible such assump-
tions can and should be validated by measurements of prototypes or existing systems.

From this analysis, the system architect is able to determine that an availability requirement of
99.999% can be met using the Passive Redundancy (warm sparing) tactic, albeit with no addition-
al margin. Note also that this analysis also indicates the difficulty in achieving a more stringent
99.9999% (a.k.a. “6 nines”) of availability, even when the more complex and more costly Active
Redundancy tactic is used.




Figure 5: Markov Model of System Availability




20 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
Table 5:       System Availability of Redundancy Tactic Used

   Function       Failure Severity   MTBF (Hours)   MTTR_active (Sec) MTTR_passive (Sec) MTTR_sparing (Sec)
                          1            250,000                       1                 5                900
Hardware
                          2            50,000                      30                 30                 30
                          1            50,000                        1                 5                900
Software
                          2            10,000                      30                 30                 30
Availability                                                 0.999998          0.999990              0.9982


3.2 The Resulting Redundancy Tactic

In this example we achieved equipment protection via the Passive Redundancy (warm sparing)
tactic, where the active processor(s) in a protection group receives input traffic and transmits
checkpointed state periodically to the associated redundant spare(s). In practice, this tactic
achieves a reasonable balance between design complexity and performance for MTTR. Systems
designed for high availability (99.999% uptime) commonly employ Passive Redundancy. Con-
versely, systems with more stringent availability requirements will necessarily employ the more
complex Active Redundancy (hot sparing) tactic, to further reduce MTTR.




Figure 6: Passive Redundancy Tactics

A realization of the Passive Redundancy tactic, embedded in a pattern, is illustrated in Figure 6,
where each of the boxes is a system node. The pattern employs four functions: the Active Node,
the Redundant (passive/warm spare) Node, a Redundancy Manager, and a System Journal (a jour-
naling mechanism). The Active and Redundant Nodes are identical copies of a system processor
(or collection of processors). The Active Node periodically transmits checkpointed state data to
the Redundant Node, to maintain a loosely synchronized state. The System Journal is employed
to ensure that transient state not included in the checkpoint data set is not lost as a result of a role
change (where the Redundant Node assumes the Active role). The Redundancy Manager is used
to manage the assignment of (Active, Spare) roles to the processors in the protection group and
detect the “liveness” of the currently designated Active Node, to identify the recovery line (i.e.,
the most recent consistent set of checkpointed data), and to manage the transmission of journaled
data from the System Journal to a Redundant Node undergoing a role change (when assuming the


21 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
role of an Active Node). This pattern may additionally employ a Reintroduction tactic such as
Coordinated Checkpointing, where the processes involved autonomously resolve checkpoint de-
pendencies and restart at a coordinated checkpoint, or may use Uncoordinated Checkpointing,
where each process is allowed to save a checkpoint when it is m
Elnozahy, Uncoordinated Checkpointing achieves a lower latency recovery for the nominal case
but can be subjected to resolving a cascade of checkpoint dependency issues for the off-nominal
case (referred to as the “Domino Effect”) [Elnozahy 2002]. Coordinated Checkpointing elimi-
nates the Domino Effect at a cost of slightly higher latency for each recovery (due to the
processing penalty associated with central management of the distributed checkpoint data). An
excellent survey of best practices for checkpoint rollback-recovery protocols is provided by
Elnozahy [Elnozahy 2002].

For cases where either a singleton spare is used to protect multiple active nodes (1:N, pronounced
“one for N”) or multiple spares are used to protect multiple active nodes (M:N), the checkpoint
and journal data can be saved to persistent (or redundancy-protected) memory, with the Redun-
dancy Manager directing the Redundant Node as to which set of checkpoint and journaled data to
retrieve upon a role change.

In addition to simplified design complexity (when compared to the stricter state synchronization
requirements imposed by the Active Redundancy tactic), we find that the time overhead for the
nominal case of Passive Redundancy is low, as it is a function solely of the time required to ex-
port the journaled (transient, uncheckpointed) data from the Active Node and to periodically cal-
culate a new recovery line, save the data as a checkpoint, and transmit the checkpointed state to
the Redundant Node. Similarly, the space overhead imposed by this tactic is low, bounded by the
checkpointed state residing on the Active and Redundant Nodes and the transient journaled data
maintained on the Active Node and on the node hosting the System Journal. And finally, the
communication overhead imposed by this tactic for the nominal case is also low, bounded by the
control messaging used to register with the System Journal and for the Redundancy Manager to
(re)assign roles, and the replication of checkpoint and journaled data between Active Node and
the Redundant Node and System Journal, respectively [Saridakis 2002].

3.3 Tactics Guide Architectural Decisions

The system architect needs to determine the appropriate availability tactic(s) to employ based on a
consideration of the MTTR requirements for the various network services enabled by the device,
as well as the side effects of the chosen tactics. For example, if a given processor in the system
hosts a service with a requirement that service outages be repaired on sub-second timescales, then
Active Redundancy (hot sparing) is the suitable availability tactic. Conversely, if that processor
hosts a service that requires that outages be repaired in timescales measured in seconds, then Pas-
sive Redundancy (warm sparing) may be employed. And, if the system requirements allow for
service outages to be repaired in timescales measured in minutes, then Sparing (cold sparing) is a
suitable availability tactic to employ. Note also that some systems have both stringent availability
and reliability requirements, in which case it may be necessary to employ either Active Redundan-
cy or Passive Redundancy (to address the MTTR component of the availability requirement) in
tandem with Sparing (to address system reliability requirements relating to Mean Mission Dura-
tion). Each of these tactics has side effects: Active Redundancy consumes more runtime resources
(processing and communication) than Passive Redundancy, to keep the redundant components


22 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
synchronized. And both Active and Passive Redundancy increase the cost of the system more than
Sparing. In each case the availability requirement, along with performance requirements and con-
straints on costs, guides the architect to a choice of tactics, even though the analysis is initially at
a crude, often heuristic, level.

In determining the appropriate availability tactic(s) to employ, the system architect must consider
the system availability requirement(s) and any associated availability sub-allocations for the con-
stituent system components. Recall from the previous discussion that availability extends the
concept of system reliability (defined by the MTBF) to include the notion of Mean Time to
Recovery (MTTR). It is the system MTTR (or associated MTTR values sub-allocated to the
system‟s constituent components) that determine the set of appropriate availability tactics to
consider.

For the high-availability example provided, various architectural alternatives could be considered.
For example, rather than employ the Passive Redundancy tactic, the architect could specify the
more stringent Active Redundancy tactic, which would provide a greater capability with regard to
system availability but at the risk of over-engineering the system (increasing cost and complexity)
for the given set of requirements. Once Passive Redundancy had been selected as the suitable
tactic, the size of the protection group had to be considered. For example, would the system em-
ploy a 1:1 form of equipment protection, where a single warm spare is employed for each active
processor, or will the system employ a 1:N (one redundant spare used for N active processors)
form, or even an M:N (M redundant spares used to protect N active processors) form of equip-
ment protection?

Next, once the sparing model has been selected, the design space includes multiple options for
realizing the Reintroduction tactic. For example, transactional semantics can be employed to en-
sure that the ACID properties are supported by the system‟s distributed database (which does not
imply use of a relational database). Alternately, a checkpointing strategy could be used, leverag-
ing either Coordinated Checkpointing or Uncoordinated Checkpointing along with one of the
rollback recovery protocols described by Elnozahy [Elnozahy 2002]. For networking devices that
host link-state protocols, which support the notion of peering with its neighboring nodes, Reintro-
duction tactics such as Graceful Restart and Non-Stop Forwarding could be employed in order to
reacquire control plane state (from its peer) while maintaining fault-free user data services.

Verifying that the collection of tactics employed results in a system that complies with its availa-
bility requirements involves several levels of analysis. In practice, the system availability re-
quirement is decomposed into separate sub-allocations for hardware- and software-induced fail-
ures. For hardware, a common approach for estimating system reliability (the MTBF component
of availability) is to employ a Markov Chain to model the interconnection of the various hardware
components, where the failure rate function for a given component follows a Weibull distribution.
Modeling the system reliability for software-induced failures differs from the above approach due
to the failure rate function for the constituent component‟s being more accurately represented by a
Poisson distribution, due to the periodic introduction of new software releases. Popular analytical
models used to estimate software reliability are based on Markov Chains, Non-Homogeneous
Poisson Processes (NHPP), and Bayesian formulations [Musa 1987, Xie 1991].

The contribution of both hardware- and software-induced failures to system availability can be
computed as the ratio of uptime to the sum of uptime and downtime, as the time interval over


23 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
which the measurement is made approaches infinity (as described in Section 3). Note that the
downtime is the product of the failure intensity and the MTTR. To reiterate, only service-
affecting failures contribute to the system availability.




24 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
4 Implications


We can draw a number of implications from this example. The most important is that while archi-
tectural design, even for a fragment of a system, is a complex search through a potentially un-
bounded space of possibilities, the use of tactics guides and constrains this search and makes it far
more tractable. Each tactic can be associated with an analytic model (e.g., see the discussion in
Section 3.1). So tactics work on two levels: similar to architectural patterns they guide the archi-
tect towards a particular solution—a choice of a tactic—but unlike architectural patterns they sup-
port a deeper (more precise) form of analysis based on analytic models. As shown in our example,
these analyses may range from guidelines and heuristics to precise mathematical models, as dic-
tated by the level of risk surrounding the architecture‟s realization of a quality attribute.

Tactics are the building blocks of patterns. A pattern, such as the one shown in Figure 6, is a
composition of multiple tactics: System Monitor, Passive Redundancy, State Resynchronization,
Rollback, and so on. Each of these may in turn be decomposed into even lower level tactics
(Heartbeat, Coordinated Checkpoint, Graceful Restart, Non-Stop Forwarding, etc.).




25 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
26 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
5 Conclusions


This report has presented an update to the catalog of architectural tactics for availability. We have
a similar update to the catalog for performance that space prevents us from presenting here.
These updates have been motivated by practice—by observing, and categorizing, the sets of tac-
tics in actual use. The structure of neither the availability nor the performance tactic catalog has
changed dramatically since they were introduced seven years ago; this shows that the notion of
tactics is robust—they are fundamental elements of design. Only the realizations of the tactics
have changed, and this is to be expected as technologies mature.

This report has also shown how the catalog of tactics can be, and is, used in practice, to guide in
making fundamental architectural design decisions that have implications in multiple dimensions.
For each tactics-based design decision there are heuristics associated with the decision, as well as
associated analytic models.

From this presentation we can see that tactics are useful in both design and analysis. They are use-
ful because they restrict the design and analysis vocabulary, reduce the size of the search space,
and directly suggest analytic models.




27 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
28 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
References


URLs are valid as of the publication date of this document.

[Bachmann 2007]
Bachmann, F.; Bass L.; & Nord, R. Modifiability Tactics (CMU/SEI-2007-TR-002). Software
Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2007.
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/07.reports/07tr002.html

[Bass 2005]
Bass, L.; Ivers, J.; Klein, M.; & Merson, P. Reasoning Frameworks (CMU/SEI-2005-TR-007
ADA441248), Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2005.
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/05.reports/05tr007.html

[Bass 2003]
Bass, L.; Clements, P.; & Kazman, R. Software Architecture in Practice, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley,
2003.

[Bellcore 1999]
Bell Communications Research. GR-1400-CORE, SONET Dual-Fed Unidirectional Path Switch-
ed Ring (UPSR) Equipment Generic Criteria. 1999.

[Bellcore 1998]
Bell Communications Research. GR-1230-CORE, SONET Bidirectional Line-Switched Ring
Equipment Generic Criteria. 1998.

[Buschmann 1996]
Buschmann, F.; Meunier, R.; Rohnert, H.; Sommerlad, P.; & Stal, M. Pattern-Oriented Software
Architecture Volume 1: A System of Patterns.Wiley, 1996.

[Dijkstra 1968]
Dijkstra, E.W. “The Structure of the „THE‟-Multiprogramming System.” Communications of the
ACM, 11, 5 (May 1968) 341-346.

[Elnozahy 2002]
Elnozahy, E. N.; Alvisi, L.; Wang, Y.; & Johnson, D. B. “A Survey of Rollback Recovery Proto-
cols in Message-Passing Systems,” ACM Computing Surveys, 34, 3( Sep. 2002) 375-408.

[Gamma 1995]
Gamma, E.; Helm, R.; Johnson, R.; & Vlissides, J. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Ob-
ject-Oriented Software. Addison-Wesley, 1995.

[Garlan 1996]
Garlan, D.; Shaw, M. Software Architecture: Perspectives on an Emerging Discipline, Prentice-
Hall, 1996.



29 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
[Gokhale 2005]
Gokhale, S.; Crigler, J.; Farr, W.; & Wallace, D. “System Availability Analysis Considering
Hardware/Software Failure Severities.” Proceedings of the 29th Annual IEEE/NASA Software
Engineering Workshop (SEW’05), April 2005, Greenbelt, MD. IEEE, 2005.

[Gray 1993]
Gray, J. & Reuter, A. Transaction Processing: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann,
1993.

[Hamming 1980]
Hamming, R.W. Coding and Information Theory, Prentice-Hall, 1980.

[IETF 1981]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 792, Internet Control Message Protocol. 1981.

[IETF 2003a]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 3473, GMPLS RSVP-TE Signaling Extensions. 2003.

[IETF 2003b]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 3478, Graceful Restart Mechanism for Label Distribution
Protocol. 2003

[IETF 2003c]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 5063, Extensions to GMPLS RSVP Graceful Restart.
2003.

[IETF 2004]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 3746, Forwarding and Control Element Separation
(ForCES) Framework. 2004.

[IETF 2005]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 4090, Fast Reroute Extensions to RSVP-TE for LSP Tun-
nels. 2005.

[IETF 2006a]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 4443, Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMPv6) for the
Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. 2006.

[IETF 2006b]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 4379, Detecting Multi-Protocol Label Switched (MPLS)
Data Plane Failures. 2006.

[IETF 2007a]
Internet Engineering Task Force RFC 3623, Graceful OSPF Restart. 2007.

[IETF 2007b]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 4724, Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP. 2007.



30 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
[IETF 2007c]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 4781, Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP with MPLS.
2007.

[IETF 2008]
Internet Engineering Task Force. RFC 5187, OSPFv3 Graceful Restart. 2008.

[Jalote 1994]
Jalote, P. Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems. Prentice-Hall, 1994.

[Lyons 1962]
Lyons, R.E. & Vanderkulk, W. “The Use of Triple Modular Redundancy to Improve Computer
Reliability.” IBM Journal, April 1962.

[Mavis 2002]
Mavis, D.G. “Soft Error Rate Mitigation Techniques for Modern Microcircuits.” 40th Annual Re-
liability Physics Symposium Proceedings. April 2002, Dallas TX. IEEE, 2002.

[Morelos-Zaragoza 2006]
Morelos-Zaragoza, R. H. The Art of Error Correcting Coding, 2nd ed. Wiley, 2006

[Musa 1987]
Musa, J.; Iannino, A.; & Okumoto, K. Software Reliability: Measurement, Prediction, Applica-
tion. McGraw-Hill, 1987.

[Powell-Douglas 1999]
Powell-Douglass, B. Doing Hard Time: Developing Real-Time Systems with UML, Objects,
Frameworks, and Patterns. Addison-Wesley, 1999.

[Saridakis 2002]
Saridakis, T. “A System of Patterns for Fault Tolerance,” 7th European Conference on Pattern
Languages of Programs (EuroPLoP). July 2002, Irsee, Germany. Universitätsverlag Konstanz,
2002.

[Schneier 2001]
Schneier, B. Applied Cryptography. Wiley, 1996.

[Scott 2008]
Scott, J. “Evaluating Distributed Systems Architectures for Fault-Tolerant Applications,” Soft-
ware Engineering Institute SATURN 2008 Conference. April-May 2008, Pittsburgh, PA. Software
Engineering Institute, 2009.

[Telcordia 2000]
Telcordia. GR-253-CORE, Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) Transport Systems: Common
Generic Criteria. 2000.




31 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
[Utas 2005]
Utas, G. Robust Communications Software: Extreme Availability, Reliability, and Scalability for
Carrier-Grade Systems.Wiley, 2005.

[Von Neumann 1956]
Von Neumann, J. “Probabilistic Logics and the Synthesis of Reliable Organisms from Unreliable
Components.” Automata Studies, C.E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, ed. Princeton University Press,
1956.

[Xie 1991]
Xie, M. Software Reliability Modeling. World Scientific, 1991.




32 | CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
                                                                                                                          Form Approved
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE                                                                                                 OMB No. 0704-0188
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, search-
ing existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regard-
ing this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters
Services, Directorate for information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302, and to the Office of
Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC 20503.
1.   AGENCY USE ONLY                                     2.   REPORT DATE                                          3.    REPORT TYPE AND DATES
                                                                                                                         COVERED
     (Leave Blank)                                            August 2009
                                                                                                                         Final
4.   TITLE AND SUBTITLE                                                                                            5.    FUNDING NUMBERS
     Realizing and Refining Architectural Tactics: Availability                                                          FA8721-05-C-0003
6.   AUTHOR(S)
     James Scott, Rick Kazman
7.   PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                               8.    PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
                                                                                                                         REPORT NUMBER
     Software Engineering Institute
     Carnegie Mellon University                                                                                          CMU/SEI-2009-TR-006
     Pittsburgh, PA 15213
9.   SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)                                                          10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
                                                                                                                         AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
     HQ ESC/XPK
     5 Eglin Street                                                                                                      ESC-TR-2009-006
     Hanscom AFB, MA 01731-2116
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES


12A DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT                                                                            12B DISTRIBUTION CODE
     Unclassified/Unlimited, DTIC, NTIS
13. ABSTRACT (MAXIMUM 200 WORDS)
Architectural tactics are fundamental design decisions. They are the building blocks for both architectural design and analysis. A catalog of
architectural tactics has now been in use for several years in academia and industry. This report illustrates the use of this catalog in industrial
applications, describing how tactics can be used in both design and analysis. The report further shows how the needs of practice have
caused the catalog of availability tactics to be updated, but demonstrates that the underlying structure of the tactics categorization has re-
mained stable. Finally, a real-world example is provided of the application of the updated set of availability tactics, showing how it illuminates
design decisions, as guided by associated heuristics and analytic models.
14. SUBJECT TERMS                                                                                                  15. NUMBER OF PAGES
     architectural tactic, availability, fault detection tactic, fault recovery tactic, fault prevention tactic          45
16. PRICE CODE


17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF                  18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION              19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION             20. LIMITATION OF
     REPORT                                          OF THIS PAGE                             OF ABSTRACT                            ABSTRACT
     Unclassified                                    Unclassified                             Unclassified                           UL
NSN 7540-01-280-5500                                                                     Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89) Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
                                                                                         298-102
