 Testability Tactics




The goal of tactics for testability is to allow for easier testing when an increment of software
development is completed. Figure 5.10 displays the use of tactics for testability. Architectural
techniques for enhancing the software testability have not received as much attention as more
mature fields such as modifiability, performance, and availability, but, as we stated in Chapter 4,
since testing consumes such a high percentage of system development cost, anything the architect
can do to reduce this cost will yield a significant benefit.
                                 Figure 5.10. Goal of testability tactics




Although in Chapter 4 we included design reviews as a testing technique, in this chapter we are
concerned only with testing a running system. The goal of a testing regimen is to discover faults.
This requires that input be provided to the software being tested and that the output be captured.
Executing the test procedures requires some software to provide input to the software being tested
and to capture the output. This is called a test harness. A question we do not consider here is the
design and generation of the test harness. In some systems, this takes substantial time and
expense.
We discuss two categories of tactics for testing: providing input and capturing output, and internal
monitoring.

INPUT/OUTPUT
There are three tactics for managing input and output for testing.
   •   Record/playback. Record/playback refers to both capturing information crossing an interface
       and using it as input into the test harness. The information crossing an interface during
       normal operation is saved in some repository and represents output from one component
       and input to another. Recording this information allows test input for one of the components
       to be generated and test output for later comparison to be saved.
   •   Separate interface from implementation. Separating the interface from the implementation
       allows substitution of implementations for various testing purposes. Stubbing
       implementations allows the remainder of the system to be tested in the absence of the
       component being stubbed. Substituting a specialized component allows the component
       being replaced to act as a test harness for the remainder of the system.
   •   Specialize access routes/interfaces. Having specialized testing interfaces allows the
       capturing or specification of variable values for a component through a test harness as well
       as independently from its normal execution. For example, metadata might be made available
       through a specialized interface that a test harness would use to drive its activities.
       Specialized access routes and interfaces should be kept separate from the access routes
       and interfaces for required functionality. Having a hierarchy of test interfaces in the
       architecture means that test cases can be applied at any level in the architecture and that the
       testing functionality is in place to observe the response.

INTERNAL MONITORING
A component can implement tactics based on internal state to support the testing process.
   •   Built-in monitors. The component can maintain state, performance load, capacity, security, or
       other information accessible through an interface. This interface can be a permanent
       interface of the component or it can be introduced temporarily via an instrumentation
       technique such as aspect-oriented programming or preprocessor macros. A common
       technique is to record events when monitoring states have been activated. Monitoring states
       can actually increase the testing effort since tests may have to be repeated with the
       monitoring turned off. Increased visibility into the activities of the component usually more
       than outweigh the cost of the additional testing.
Figure 5.11 provides a summary of the tactics used for testability.
                              Figure 5.11. Summary of testability tactics
